During the winter of 1927 28 Federal government officials made a strange and secret investigation of certain conditions in the ancient Massachusetts seaport of Innsmouth.
The public first learned of it in February, when a vast series of raids and arrests occurred, followed by the deliberate burning and dynamiting under suitable precautions of an enormous number of crumbling, worm eaten, and supposedly empty houses along the abandoned waterfront.
Uninquiring souls let this occurrence pass as one of the major clashes in a spasmodic war on liquor.
Keener news followers, however, wondered at the prodigious number of arrests, the abnormally large force of men used in making them, and the secrecy surrounding the disposal of the prisoners.
No trials, or even definite charges, were reported nor were any of the captives seen thereafter in the regular jails of the nation.
There were vague statements about disease and concentration camps, and later about dispersal in various naval and military prisons, but nothing positive ever developed.
Complaints from many liberal organizations were met with long confidential discussions, and representatives were taken on trips to certain camps and prisons.
As a result, these societies became surprisingly passive and reticent.
Newspaper men were harder to manage, but seemed largely to cooperate with the government in the end.
Only one paper a tabloid always discounted because of its wild policy mentioned the deep diving submarine that discharged torpedoes downward in the marine abyss just beyond Devil Reef.
That item, gathered by chance in a haunt of sailors, seemed indeed rather far fetched since the low, black reef lies a full mile and a half out from Innsmouth Harbor.
But at last I am going to defy the ban on speech about this thing.
Results, I am certain, are so thorough that no public harm save a shock of repulsion could ever accrue from a hinting of what was found by those horrified raiders at Innsmouth.
For my contact with this affair has been closer than that of any other layman, and I have carried away impressions which are yet to drive me to drastic measures.
It was I who fled frantically out of Innsmouth in the early morning hours of July 16, 1927, and whose frightened appeals for government inquiry and action brought on the whole reported episode.
I was willing enough to stay mute while the affair was fresh and uncertain but now that it is an old story, with public interest and curiosity gone, I have an odd craving to whisper about those few frightful hours in that ill rumored and evilly shadowed seaport of death and blasphemous abnormality.
I never heard of Innsmouth till the day before I saw it for the first and so far last time.
I was celebrating my coming of age by a tour of New England sightseeing, antiquarian, and genealogical and had planned to go directly from ancient Newburyport to Arkham, whence my mother's family was derived.
I had no car, but was traveling by train, trolley, and motor coach, always seeking the cheapest possible route.
In Newburyport they told me that the steam train was the thing to take to Arkham and it was only at the station ticket office, when I demurred at the high fare, that I learned about Innsmouth.
The stout, shrewd faced agent, whose speech showed him to be no local man, seemed sympathetic toward my efforts at economy, and made a suggestion that none of my other informants had offered.
''You could take that old bus, I suppose,'' he said with a certain hesitation, ''but it ain't thought much of hereabouts.
It goes through Innsmouth you may have heard about that and so the people don't like it.
Run by an Innsmouth fellow Joe Sargent but never gets any custom from here, or Arkham either, I guess.
Leaves the Square front of Hammond's Drug Store at 10 A.M. and 7 P.M. unless they've changed lately.
Looks like a terrible rattletrap I've never been on it.''
That was the first I ever heard of shadowed Innsmouth.
Any reference to a town not shown on common maps or listed in recent guidebooks would have interested me, and the agent's old manner of allusion roused something like real curiosity.
So I asked the agent to tell me something about it.
He was very deliberate, and spoke with an air of feeling slightly superior to what he said.
''Innsmouth?
Well, it's a queer kind of town down at the mouth of the Manuxet.
Used to be almost a city quite a port before the War of 1812 but all gone to pieces in the last hundred years or so.
No railroad now B. and M. never went through, and the branch line from Rowley was given up years ago.
''More empty houses than there are people, I guess, and no business to speak of except fishing and lobstering.
Everybody trades mostly either here or in Arkham or Ipswich.
Once they had quite a few mills, but nothing's left now except one gold refinery running on the leanest kind of part time.
''That refinery, though, used to be a big thing, and Old Man Marsh, who owns it, must be richer'n Croesus.
Queer old duck, though, and sticks mighty close in his home.
He's supposed to have developed some skin disease or deformity late in life that makes him keep out of sight.
Grandson of Captain Obed Marsh, who founded the business.
His mother seems to've been some kind of foreigner they say a South Sea islander so everybody raised Cain when he married an Ipswich girl fifty years ago.
They always do that about Innsmouth people, and folks here and hereabouts always try to cover up any Innsmouth blood they have in 'em.
But Marsh's children and grandchildren look just like anybody else so far's I can see.
I've had 'em pointed out to me here though, come to think of it, the elder children don't seem to be around lately.
Never saw the old man.
''And why is everybody so down on Innsmouth?
Well, young fellow, you mustn't take too much stock in what people around here say.
They're hard to get started, but once they do get started they never let up.
They've been telling things about Innsmouth whispering 'em, mostly for the last hundred years, I guess, and I gather they're more scared than anything else.
Some of the stories would make you laugh about old Captain Marsh driving bargains with the devil and bringing imps out of hell to live in Innsmouth, or about some kind of devil worship and awful sacrifices in some place near the wharves that people stumbled on around 1845 or there abouts but I come from Panton, Vermont, and that kind of story don't go down with me.
''You ought to hear, though, what some of the old timers tell about the black reef off the coast Devil Reef, they call it.
It's well above water a good part of the time, and never much below it, but at that you could hardly call it an island.
The story is that there's a whole legion of devils seen sometimes on that reef sprawled about, or darting in and out of some kind of caves near the top.
It's a rugged, uneven thing, a good bit over a mile out, and toward the end of shipping days sailors used to make big detours just to avoid it.
''That is, sailors that didn't hail from Innsmouth.
One of the things they had against old Captain Marsh was that he was supposed to land on it sometimes at night when the tide was right.
Maybe he did, for I dare say the rock formation was interesting, and it's just barely possible he was looking for pirate loot and maybe finding it but there was talk of his dealing with demons there.
Fact is, I guess on the whole it was really the captain that gave the bad reputation to the reef.
''That was before the big epidemic of 1846, when over half the folks in Innsmouth was carried off.
They never did quite figure out what the trouble was, but it was probably some foreign kind of disease brought from China or somewhere by the shipping.
It surely was bad enough there was riots over it, and all sorts of ghastly doings that I don't believe ever got outside of town and it left the place in awful shape.
Never came back there can't be more'n 300 or 400 people living there now.
''But the real thing behind the way folks feel is simply race prejudice and I don't say I'm blaming those that hold it.
I hate those Innsmouth folks myself, and I wouldn't care to go to their town.
I s'pose you know though I can see you're a Westerner by your talk what a lot our New England ships used to have to do with queer ports in Africa, Asia, the South Seas, and everywhere else, and what queer kinds of people they sometimes brought back with 'em.
You've probably heard about the Salem man that came home with a Chinese wife, and maybe you know there's still a bunch of Fiji Islanders somewhere around Cape Cod.
''Well, there must be something like that back of the Innsmouth people.
The place always was badly cut off from the rest of the country by marshes and creeks, and we can't be sure about the ins and outs of the matter but it's pretty clear that old Captain Marsh must have brought home some odd specimens when he had all three of his ships in commission back in the twenties and thirties.
There certainly is a strange kind of a streak in the Innsmouth folks today I don't know how to explain it, but it sort of makes you crawl.
You'll notice a little in Sargent if you take his bus.
Some of 'em have queer narrow heads with flat noses and bulgy, starey eyes that never seem to shut, and their skin ain't quite right.
Rough and scabby, and the sides of their necks are all shriveled or creased up.
Get bald, too, very young.
The older fellows look the worst fact is, I don't believe I've ever seen a very old chap of that kind.
Guess they must die of looking in the glass!
Animals hate 'em they used to have lots of horse trouble before autos came in.
''Nobody can ever keep track of those people, and state school officials and census men have a devil of a time.
You can bet that prying strangers ain't welcome around Innsmouth.
I've heard personally of more'n one business or government man that's disappeared there, and there's loose talk of one who went crazy and is out at Danvers now.
They must have fixed up some awful scare for that fellow.
''That's why I wouldn't go at night if I was you.
I've never been there and have no wish to go, but I guess a daytime trip couldn't hurt you even though the people hereabouts will advise you not to make it.
If you're just sightseeing, and looking for old time stuff, Innsmouth ought to be quite a place for you.''
And so I spent part of that evening at the Newburyport Public Library looking up data about Innsmouth.
The Essex County histories on the library shelves had very little to say, except that the town was founded in 1643, noted for shipbuilding before the Revolution, a seat of great marine prosperity in the early 19th century, and later a minor factory center using the Manuxet as power.
The epidemic and riots of 1846 were very sparsely treated, as if they formed a discredit to the country.
References to decline were few, though the significance of the later record was unmistakable.
After the Civil War all industrial life was confined to the Marsh Refining Company, and the marketing of gold ingots formed the only remaining bit of major commerce aside from the eternal fishing.
Most interesting of all was a glancing reference to the strange jewelry vaguely associated with Innsmouth.
It had evidently impressed the whole countryside more than a little, for mention was made of specimens in the museum of Miskatonic University at Arkham, and in the display room of the Newburyport Historical Society.
I resolved to see the local sample said to be a large, queerly proportioned thing evidently meant for a tiara if it could possibly be arranged.
The librarian gave me a note of introduction to the curator of the Society, a Miss Anna Tilton, who lived nearby, and after a brief explanation that ancient gentlewoman was kind enough to pilot me into the closed building, since the hour was not outrageously late.
The collection was a notable one indeed, but in my present mood I had eyes for nothing but the bizarre object which glistened in a corner cupboard under the electric lights.
It took no excessive sensitiveness to beauty to make me literally gasp at the strange, unearthly splendor of the alien, opulent phantasy that rested there on a purple velvet cushion.
The longer I looked, the more the thing fascinated me and in this fascination there was a curiously disturbing element hardly to be classified or accounted for.
I decided that it was the queer other worldly quality of the art which made me uneasy.
It was as if the workmanship were that of another planet.
The patterns all hinted of remote secrets and unimaginable abysses in time and space, and the monotonously aquatic nature of the reliefs became almost sinister.
Among these reliefs were fabulous monsters of abhorrent grotesqueness and malignity wholly primal and awesomely ancestral.
At times I fancied that every contour of these blasphemous fish frogs was overflowing with the ultimate quintessence of unknown and inhuman evil.
In odd contrast to the tiara's aspect was its brief and prosy history as related by Miss Tilton.
It had been pawned for a ridiculous sum at a shop in State Street in 1873, by a drunken Innsmouth man shortly afterward killed in a brawl.
Miss Tilton was inclined to believe that it formed part of some exotic pirate hoard discovered by old Captain Obed Marsh.
This view was surely not weakened by the insistent offers of purchase at a high price which the Marshes began to make as soon as they knew of its presence, and which they repeated to this day despite the Society's unvarying determination not to sell.
As the good lady showed me out of the building, she assured me that the rumors of devil worship were partly justified by a peculiar secret cult which had gained force there and engulfed all the orthodox churches.
It was called, she said, ''The Esoteric Order of Dagon,'' and was undoubtedly a debased, quasi pagan thing imported from the East a century before, at a time when Innsmouth fisheries seemed to be going barren.
Its persistence among a simple people was quite natural in view of the sudden and permanent return of abundantly fine fishing, and it soon came to be the greatest influence on the town.
All this, to the pious Miss Tilton, formed an excellent reason for shunning the ancient town of decay and desolation but to me it was merely a fresh incentive and I could scarcely sleep in my small room at the ''Y'' as the night wore away.
Shortly before ten the next morning I stood with my one small valise in front of Hammond's Drug Store in old Market Square waiting for the Innsmouth bus.
In a few moments a small motor coach of extreme decrepitude and dirty gray color rattled down State Street, made a turn, and drew up at the curb beside me.
I felt immediately that it was the right one a guess which the half illegible sign on the windshield ''Arkham Innsmouth Newb'port'' soon verified.
There were only three passengers dark, unkempt men of sullen visage and somewhat youthful cast and when the vehicle stopped they clumsily shambled out and began walking up State Street in a silent, almost furtive fashion.
The driver also alighted.
This, I reflected, must be the Joe Sargent mentioned by the ticket agent and even before I had noticed any details there spread over me a wave of spontaneous aversion which could be neither checked nor explained.
He was a thin, stoop shouldered man not much under six feet tall, dressed in shabby blue civilian clothes and wearing a frayed gray golf cap.
His age was perhaps thirty five, but the odd, deep creases in the sides of his neck made him seem older when one did not study his dull, expressionless face.
He had a narrow head, bulging, watery blue eyes that seemed never to wink, a flat nose, a receding forehead and chin, and singularly undeveloped ears.
As he walked toward the bus I observed his peculiarly shambling gait and saw that his feet were inordinately immense.
The more I studied them the more I wondered how he could buy any shoes to fit them.
A certain greasiness about the fellow increased my dislike.
He was evidently given to working or lounging around the fish docks, and carried with him much of their characteristic smell.
Just what foreign blood was in him I could not even guess.
I was sorry when I saw that there would be no other passengers on the bus.
Somehow I did not like the idea of riding alone with this driver.
But as the leaving time obviously approached I conquered my qualms and followed the man aboard, extending him a dollar bill and murmuring the single word ''Innsmouth.''
At length the decrepit vehicle started with a jerk, and rattled noisily past the old brick buildings of State Street amidst a cloud of vapor from the exhaust.
The day was warm and sunny, but the landscape of sand, sedge grass, and stunted shrubbery became more and more desolate as we proceeded.
Out the window I could see the blue water and the sandy line of Plum Island, and we presently drew very near the beach as our narrow road veered off from the main highway to Rowley and Ipswich.
At last we lost sight of Plum Island and saw the vast expanse of the open Atlantic on our left.
Our narrow course began to climb steeply, and I felt a singular sense of disquiet in looking at the lonely crest ahead where the rutted roadway met the sky.
It was as if the bus were about to keep on its ascent leaving the sane earth altogether and merging with the unknown arcana of upper air and cryptical sky.
The smell of the sea took on ominous implications, and the silent driver's bent, rigid back and narrow head became more and more hateful.
As I looked at him I saw that the back of his head was almost as hairless as his face, having only a few straggling yellow strands upon a gray scabrous surface.
Then we reached the crest and beheld the outspread valley beyond, where the Manuxet joins the sea just north of the long line of cliffs that culminate in Kingsport Head all my attention was captured by the nearer panorama just below me.
I had, I realized, come face to face with rumor shadowed Innsmouth.
It was a town of wide extent and dense construction, yet one with a portentous dearth of visible life.
The vast huddle of sagging gambrel roofs and peaked gables conveyed with offensive clearness the idea of wormy decay, and as we approached along the now descending road I could see that many roofs had wholly caved in.
Stretching inland I saw the rusted, grass grown line of the abandoned railway, with leaning telegraph poles now devoid of wires.
Here and there the ruins of wharves jutted out from the shore to end in indeterminate rottenness, those farthest south seeming the most decayed.
And far out at sea, despite a high tide, I glimpsed a long, black line scarcely rising above the water yet carrying a suggestion of odd latent malignancy.
This, I knew, must be Devil Reef.
As I looked, a subtle, curious sense of beckoning seemed superadded to the grim repulsion and oddly enough, I found this overtone more disturbing than the primary impression.
As the bus reached a lower level I began to catch the steady note of a waterfall through the unnatural stillness.
The leaning, unpainted houses grew thicker, lined both sides of the road, and displayed more urban tendencies than did those we were leaving behind.
The panorama ahead had contracted to a street scene, and in spots I could see where a cobblestone pavement and stretches of brick sidewalk had formerly existed.
All the houses were apparently deserted, and there were occasional gaps where tumbledown chimneys and cellar walls told of buildings that had collapsed.
Pervading everything was the most nauseous fishy odor imaginable.
And I was not to reach my destination without one other very strong impression of poignantly disagreeable quality.
The bus had come to a sort of open concourse or radial point with churches on two sides and the bedraggled remains of a circular green in the center, and I was looking at a large pillared hall on the right hand junction ahead.
The structure's once white paint was now gray and peeling, and the black and gold sign on the pediment was so faded that I could only with difficulty make out the words ''Esoteric Order of Dagon.''
The door of the church basement was open, revealing a rectangle of blackness inside.
And as I looked, a certain object crossed or seemed to cross that dark rectangle burning into my brain a momentary conception of nightmare which was all the more maddening because analysis could not show a single nightmarish quality in it.
It was a living object the first except the driver that I had seen since entering the compact part of the town and had I been in a steadier mood I would have found nothing whatever of terror in it.
Clearly, as I realized a moment later, it was the pastor clad in some peculiar vestments doubtless introduced since the Order of Dagon had modified the ritual of the local churches.
The thing which had probably caught my first subconscious glance and supplied the touch of bizarre horror was the tall tiara he wore an almost exact duplicate of the one Miss Tilton had shown me the previous evening.
This, acting on my imagination, had supplied namelessly sinister qualities to the indeterminate face and robed, shambling form beneath it.
A very thin sprinkling of repellent looking youngish people now became visible on the sidewalks lone individuals, and silent knots of two or three.
The lower floors of the crumbling houses sometimes harbored small shops with dingy signs, and I noticed a parked truck or two as we rattled along.
The sound of waterfalls became more and more distinct, and presently I saw a fairly deep river gorge ahead, spanned by a wide, iron railed highway bridge beyond which a large square opened out.
Then we rolled into the large semicircular square across the river and drew up on the right hand side in front of a tall, cupola crowned building with remnants of yellow paint and with a half effaced sign proclaiming it to be the Gilman House.
I was glad to get out of that bus, and at once proceeded to check my valise in the shabby hotel lobby.
There was only one person in sight an elderly man without what I had come to call the ''Innsmouth look'' and I decided not to ask him any of the questions which bothered me remembering that odd things had been noticed in this hotel.
Instead, I strolled out on the square, from which the bus had already gone, and studied the scene minutely and appraisingly.
For some reason or other I chose to make my first inquiries at the chain grocery, whose personnel was not likely to be native to Innsmouth.
I found a solitary boy of about seventeen in charge, and was pleased to note the brightness and affability which promised cheerful information.
He seemed exceptionally eager to talk, and I soon gathered that he did not like the place, its fishy smell, or its furtive people.
His family did not like him to work in Innsmouth, but the chain had transferred him there and he did not wish to give up his job.
There was, he said, no public library or chamber of commerce in Innsmouth, but I could probably find my way about.
The street I had come down was Federal.
West of that were the fine old residence streets Broad, Washington, Lafayette, and Adams and east of it were the shoreward slums.
Certain spots were almost forbidden territory, as he had learned at considerable cost.
One must not, for example, linger much around the Marsh refinery, or around any of the still used churches, or around the pillared Order of Dagon Hall at New Church Green.
Those churches were very odd all violently disavowed by their respective denominations elsewhere, and apparently using the queerest kind of ceremonials and clerical vestments.
As for the Innsmouth people the youth hardly knew what to make of them.
Their appearance especially those staring, unwinking eyes which one never saw shut was certainly shocking enough and their voices were disgusting.
It was awful to hear them chanting in their churches at night, and especially during their main festivals or revivals, which fell twice a year on April 30 and October 31.
They were very fond of the water, and swam a great deal in both river and harbor.
Swimming races out to Devil Reef were very common, and everyone in sight seemed well able to share in this arduous sport.
It would be of no use, my informant said, to ask the natives anything about the place.
The only one who would talk was a very aged but normal looking man who lived at the poorhouse on the north rim of the town and spent his time walking about or lounging around the fire station.
This hoary character, Zadok Allen, was 96 years old and somewhat touched in the head, besides being the town drunkard.
He was a strange, furtive creature who constantly looked over his shoulder as if afraid of something, and when sober could not be persuaded to talk at all with strangers.
He was, however, unable to resist any offer of his favorite poison and once drunk would furnish the most astonishing fragments of whispered reminiscence.
After all, though, little useful data could be gained from him since his stories were all insane, incomplete hints of impossible marvels and horrors which could have no source save in his own distorted fancy.
Nobody ever believed him, but the natives did not like him to drink and talk with any strangers and it was not always safe to be seen questioning him.
It was probably from him that some of the wildest popular whispers and delusions were derived.
The Marshes, together with the other three gently bred families of the town the Waites, the Gilmans, and the Eliots were all very retiring.
They lived in immense houses along Washington Street, and several were reputed to harbor in concealment certain kinsfolk whose personal aspect forbade public view, and whose deaths had been reported and recorded.
Warning me that most of the street signs were down, the youth drew for my benefit a rough but ample and painstaking sketch map of the town's salient features.
After a moment's study I felt sure that it would be of great help, and pocketed it with profuse thanks.
Thus began my systematic though half bewildered tour of Innsmouth's narrow, shadow blighted ways.
Crossing the bridge and turning toward the roar of the lower falls, I passed close to the Marsh refinery, which seemed oddly free from the noise of industry.
This building stood on the steep river bluff near a bridge and an open confluence of streets which I took to be the earliest civic center, displaced after the Revolution by the present Town Square.
Re crossing the gorge on the Main Street bridge, I struck a region of utter desertion which somehow made me shudder.
Collapsing huddles of gambrel roofs formed a jagged and fantastic skyline, above which rose the ghoulish, decapitated steeple of an ancient church.
Fish Street was as deserted as Main, though it differed in having many brick and stone warehouses still in excellent shape.
Water Street was almost its duplicate, save that there were great seaward gaps where wharves had been.
Not a living thing did I see, except for the scattered fishermen on the distant breakwater, and not a sound did I hear save the lapping of the harbor tides and the roar of the falls in the Manuxet.
I kept north along Main to Martin, then turning inland, crossing Federal Street safely north of the Green, and entering the decayed patrician neighborhood of northern Broad, Washington, Lafayette, and Adams Streets.
Following Washington Street toward the river, I now faced a zone of former industry and commerce noting the ruins of a factory ahead, and seeing others, with the traces of an old railway station and covered railway bridge beyond up the gorge on my right.
The uncertain bridge now before me was posted with a warning sign, but I took the risk and crossed again to the south bank where traces of life reappeared.
Furtive, shambling creatures stared cryptically in my direction, and more normal faces eyed me coldly and curiously.
Innsmouth was rapidly becoming intolerable, and I turned down Paine Street toward the Square in the hope of getting some vehicle to take me to Arkham before the still distant starting time of that sinister bus.
It was then that I saw the tumbledown fire station on my left, and noticed the red faced, bushy bearded, watery eyed old man in nondescript rags who sat on a bench in front of it talking with a pair of unkempt but not abnormal looking firemen.
This, of course, must be Zadok Allen, the half crazed, liquorish non agenarian whose tales of old Innsmouth and its shadow were so hideous and incredible.
I had been assured that the old man could do nothing but hint at wild, disjointed, and incredible legends, and I had been warned that the natives made it unsafe to be seen talking with him yet the thought of this aged witness to the town's decay, with memories going back to the early days of ships and factories, was a lure that no amount of reason could make me resist.
Curiosity flared up beyond sense and caution, and in my youthful egotism I fancied I might be able to sift a nucleus of real history from the confused, extravagant outpouring I would probably extract with the aid of whiskey.
A quart bottle of such was easily, though not cheaply, obtained in the rear of a dingy variety store just off the Square in Eliot Street.
Re entering the Square I saw that luck was with me for shuffling out of Paine Street around the corner of the Gilman House I glimpsed nothing less than the tall, lean, tattered form of old Zadok Allen himself.
In accordance with my plan, I attracted his attention by brandishing my newly purchased bottle and soon realized that he had begun to shuffle wistfully after me as I turned into Waite Street on my way to the most deserted region I could think of.
Before I reached Main Street I could hear a faint and wheezy ''Hey, Mister!''
behind me, and I presently allowed the old man to catch up and take copious pulls from the quart bottle.
I began putting out feelers as we walked along to Water Street and turned southward amidst the omnipresent desolation and crazily tilted ruins, but found that the aged tongue did not loosen as quickly as I had expected.
At length I saw a grass grown opening toward the sea between crumbling brick walls, with the weedy length of an earth and masonry wharf projecting beyond.
Piles of moss covered stones near the water promised tolerable seats, and the scene was sheltered from all possible view by a ruined warehouse on the north.
About four hours remained for conversation if I were to catch the eight o'clock coach for Arkham, and I began to dole out more liquor to the ancient tippler meanwhile eating my own frugal lunch.
In my donations I was careful not to overshoot the mark, for I did not wish Zadok's vinous garrulousness to pass into a stupor.
After an hour his furtive taciturnity showed signs of disappearing, and something or other had caused his wandering gaze to light on the low, distant line of Devil Reef, then showing plainly and almost fascinatingly above the waves.
He bent toward me, took hold of my coat lapel, and hissed out some hints that could not be mistaken.
''Thar's whar it all begun that cursed place of all wickedness whar the deep water starts.
Gate o' hell sheer drop daown to a bottom no saoundin' line kin tech.
Ol' Cap'n Obed done it him that faound aout more'n was good fer him in the Saouth Sea islands.
''Never was nobody like Cap'n Obed old limb o' Satan!
Heh, heh!
I kin mind him a tellin' abaout furren parts, an' callin' all the folks stupid fer goin' to Christian meetin' an' bearin' their burdens meek an' lowly.
Says they'd orter git better gods like some o' the folks in the Injies gods as ud bring 'em good fishin' in return fer their sacrifices, an' ud reely answer folks's prayers.
''Matt Eliot, his fust mate, talked a lot, too, only he was agin' folks's doin' any heathen things.
Told abaout an island east of Othaheite whar they was a lot o' stone ruins older'n anybody knew anything abaout, kind o' like them on Ponape, in the Carolines, but with carvin's of faces that looked like the big statues on Easter Island.
They was a little volcanic island near thar, too, whar they was other ruins with diff'rent carvin's ruins all wore away like they'd ben under the sea onct, an' with picters of awful monsters all over 'em.
''Wal, Sir, Matt he says the natives araound thar had all the fish they cud ketch, an' sported bracelets an' armlets an' head rigs made aout of a queer kind o' gold an' covered with picters o' monsters jest like the ones carved over the ruins on the little island sorter fishlike frogs or froglike fishes that was drawed in all kinds o' positions like they was human bein's.
Nobody cud git aout o' them whar they got all the stuff, an' all the other natives wondered haow they managed to find fish in plenty even when the very next islands had lean pickin's.
Matt he got to wonderin' too, an' so did Cap'n Obed.
Obed, he notices, besides, that lots of the han'some young folks ud drop aout o' sight fer good from year to year, an' that they wan't many old folk araound.
Also, he thinks some of the folks looks durned queer even fer Kanakys.
''It took Obed to git the truth aout o' them heathens.
I dun't know haow he done it, but he begun by tradin' fer the gold like things they wore.
Ast 'em whar they come from, an' ef they cud git more, an' finally wormed the story aout o' the old chief Walakea, they called him.
Nobody but Obed ud ever a believed the old yeller devil, but the Cap'n cud read folks like they was books.
Heh, heh!
Nobody never believes me naow when I tell 'em, an I dun't s'pose you will, young feller though come to look at ye, ye hev kind o' got them sharp readin' eyes like Obed had.''
The old man's whisper grew fainter, and I found myself shuddering at the terrible and sincere portentousness of his intonation, even though I knew his tale could be nothing but drunken phantasy.
''Wal, Sir, Obed he larnt that they's things on this arth as most folks never heard abaout an' wouldn't believe ef they did hear.
It seems these Kanakys was sacrificin' heaps o' their young men an' maidens to some kind o' god things that lived under the sea, an' gittin' all kinds o' favors in return.
They met the things on the little islet with the queer ruins, an' it seems them awful picters o' frog fish monsters was supposed to be picters o' these things.
Mebbe they was the kind o' critters as got all the mermaids stories an' sech started.
They had all kinds o' cities on the sea bottom, an' this island was heaved up from thar.
Seems they was some of the things alive in the stone buildin's when the island come up sudden to the surface.
That's haow the Kanakys got wind they was daown thar.
Made sign talk as soon as they got over bein' skeert, an' pieced up a bargain afore long.
''Them things liked human sacrifices.
Had had 'em ages afore, but lost track o' the upper world arter a time.
What they done to the victims it ain't fer me to say, an' I guess Obed wa'n't none too sharp abaout askin'.
But it was all right with the heathens, because they'd ben havin' a hard time an' was desp'rate abaout everything.
They give a sarten number o' young folks to the sea things twict every year May Eve an' Hallowe'en reg'lar as cud be.
Also give some o' the carved knick knacks they made.
What the things agreed to give in return was a plenty o' fish they druv 'em in from all over the sea an' a few gold like things naow an' then.
''When it come to matin' with them toad lookin' fishes, the Kanakys kind o' balked, but finally they larnt something as put a new face on the matter.
Seems that human folks has got a kind o' relation to sech water beasts that everything alive come aout o' the water onct, an' only needs a little change to go back agin.
Them things told the Kanakys that ef they mixed bloods there'd be children as ud look human at fust, but later turn more'n more like the things, till finally they'd take to the water an' jine the main lot o' things daown thar.
An' this is the important part, young feller them as turned into fish things an' went into the water wouldn't never die.
Them things never died excep' they was kilt violent.
''Wal, Sir, it seems by the time Obed knowed them islanders they was all full o' fish blood from them deep water things.
When they got old an' begun to show it, they was kep' hid until they felt like takin' to the water an' quittin' the place.
Some was more teched than others, an' some never did change quite enough to take to the water but mostly they turned aout jest the way them things said.
Them as was born more like the things changed arly, but them as was nearly human sometimes stayed on the island till they was past seventy, though they'd usually go daown under fer trial trips afore that.
Folks as had took to the water, gen'rally come back a good deal to visit, so's a man ud often be a talkin' to his own five times great grandfather, who'd left the dry land a couple o' hundred years or so afore.
''Everybody got aout o' the idee o' dyin' excep' in canoe wars with the other islanders, or as sacrifices to the sea gods daown below, or from snake bite or plague or sharp gallopin' ailments or somethin' afore they cud take to the water but simply looked forrad to a kind o' change that wa'n't a bit horrible arter a while.
They thought what they'd got was well wuth all they'd had to give up an' I guess Obed kind o' come to think the same hisself when he'd chewed over old Walakea's story a bit.
Walakea, though, was one of the few as hadn't got none of the fish blood bein' of a royal line that intermarried with royal lines on other islands.
''Walakea give him a funny kind o' thingumajig made aout o' lead or something, that he said ud bring up the fish things from any place in the water whar they might be a nest of 'em.
The idee was to drop it daown with the right kind o' prayers an' sech.
Walakea allaowed as was the things was scattered all over the world, so's anybody that looked abaout cud find a nest an' bring 'em up ef they was wanted.
''Matt he didn't like this business at all, an' wanted Obed shud keep away from the island but the Cap'n was sharp fer gain, an' faound he cud git them gold like things so cheap it ud pay him to make a specialty of 'em.
''Things went on that way fer years, an' Obed got enough o' that gold like stuff to make him start the refinery in Waite's old run daown fullin' mill.
''Wall, come abaout 'thutty eight when I was seven year' old Obed he faound the island people all wiped aout between v'yages.
Seems the other islanders had got wind o' what was goin' on, an' had took matters into their own hands.
S'pose they must a had, arter all, them old magic signs as the sea things says was the only things they was afeard of.
No tellin' what any o' them Kanakys will chance to git a holt of when the sea bottom throws up some island with ruins older'n the deluge.
Pious cusses, these was they didn't leave nothin' standin' on either the main island or the little volcanic islet excep' what parts of the ruins was too big to knock daown.
''That naturally hit Obed pretty hard, seein' as his normal trade was doin' very poor.
It hit the whole of Innsmouth, too, because in seafarin' days what profited the master of a ship gen'lly profited the crew proportionate.
Most o' the folks araound the taown took the hard times kind o' sheeplike an' resigned, but they was in bad shape because the fishin' was peterin' aout an' the mills wa'n't doin' none too well.
''Then's the time Obed he begun a cursin' at the folks fer bein' dull sheep an' prayin' to a Christian heaven as didn't help 'em none.
He told 'em he'd knowed of folks as prayed to gods that give somethin' ye reely need, an' says ef a good bunch o' men ud stand by him, he cud mebbe git a holt o' sarten paowers as ud bring plenty o' fish an' quite a bit o' gold.''
Here the old man faltered, mumbled, and lapsed into a moody and apprehensive silence glancing nervously over his shoulder and then turning back to stare fascinatedly at the distant black reef.
When I spoke to him he did not answer, so I knew I would have to let him finish the bottle.
He licked its nose and slipped it into his pocket, then beginning to nod and whisper softly to himself.
I bent close to catch any articulate words he might utter, and thought I saw a sardonic smile behind the stained, bushy whiskers.
Yes he was really forming words, and I could grasp a fair proportion of them.
''Poor Matt Matt he allus was agin it tried to line up the folks on his side, an' had long talks with the preachers no use they run the Congregational parson aout o' taown, an' the Methodist feller quit never did see Resolved Babcock, the Baptist parson, agin Wrath o' Jehovy I was a mighty little critter, but I heerd what I heerd an' seen what I seen Dagon an' Ashtoreth Belial an' Beelzebub Golden Caff an' the idols o' Canaan an' the Philistines Babylonish abominations Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin ''  He stopped again, and from the look in his watery blue eyes I feared he was close to a stupor after all.
But when I gently shook his shoulder he turned on me with astonishing alertness and snapped out some more obscure phrases.
''Dun't believe me, hey?
Heh, heh, heh then just tell me, young feller, why Cap'n Obed an' twenty odd other folks used to row aout to Devil Reef in the dead o' night an' chant things so laoud ye cud hear 'em all over taown when the wind was right?
Tell me that, hey?
An' tell me why Obed was allus droppin' heavy things daown into the deep water t'other side o' the reef whar the bottom shoots daown like a cliff lower'n ye kin saound?
Tell me what he done with that funny shaped lead thingumajig as Walakea give him?
Hey, boy?''
The watery blue eyes were almost savage and maniacal now, and the dirty white beard bristled electrically.
Old Zadok probably saw me shrink back, for he began to cackle evilly.
''Heh, heh, heh, heh!
Beginnin' to see, hey?
Haow abaout the night I took my pa's ship's glass up to a cupalo an' seed the reef a bristlin' thick with shapes that dove off quick soon's the moon riz?
Obed an' the folks was in a dory, but them shapes dove off the far side into the deep water an' never come up.... Haow'd ye like to be a little shaver alone up in a cupalo a watchin' shapes as wa'n't human shapes?...
Hey?...
Heh, heh, heh, heh....''  The old man was getting hysterical, and I began to shiver with a nameless alarm.
He laid a gnarled claw on my shoulder, and it seemed to me that its shaking was not altogether that of mirth.
''S'pose one night ye seed somethin' heavy heaved offen Obed's dory beyond the reef, an' then larned nex' day a young feller was missin' from home?
Hey?
Did anybody ever see hide or hair o' Hiram Gilman agin?
Did they?
An' Nick Pierce, an' Luelly Waite, an' Adoniram Saouthwick, an' Henry Garrison?
Hey?
Heh, heh....  ''Wal, Sir, that was the time Obed begun to git on his feet agin.
Folks see his three darters a wearin' gold like things as nobody'd never see on 'em afore, an' smoke started comin' aout o' the refin'ry chimbly.
Other folks was prosp'rin', too fish began to swarm into the harbor fit to kill, an' heaven knows what sized cargoes we begun to ship aout to Newb'ryport, Arkham, an' Boston.
'Twas then Obed got the ol' branch railrud put through.
''Remember, I ain't sayin' Obed was set on hevin' things jest like they was on that Kanaky isle.
I dun't think he aimed at fust to do no mixin', nor raise no young uns to take to the water an' turn into fishes with etarnal life.
He wanted them gold things, an' was willin' to pay heavy, an' I guess the others was satisfied fer a while....  ''Come in 'forty six the taown done some lookin' an' thinkin' fer itself.
Too many folks missin' too much wild preachin' at meetin' of a Sunday too much talk abaout that reef.
I guess I done a bit by tellin' Selectman Mowry what I see from the cupalo.
They was a party one night as follered Obed's craowd aout to the reef, an' I heerd shots betwixt the dories.
Nex' day Obed an' thutty two others was in jail, with everybody a wonderin' jest what was afoot an' jest what charge agin 'em cud be got to holt.
God, ef anybody'd looked ahead ... a couple o' weeks later, when nothin' had ben throwed into the sea fer that long....''  Zadok was showing signs of fright and exhaustion, and I let him keep silence for a while, though glancing apprehensively at my watch.
The tide had turned and was coming in now, and the sound of the waves seemed to arouse him.
''That awful night....
I seed 'em....
I was up in the cupalo ... hordes of 'em ... swarms of 'em ... all over the reef an' swimmin' up the harbor into the Manuxet.... God, what happened in the streets of Innsmouth that night ... they rattled our door, but pa wouldn't open ... then he clumb aout the kitchen winder with his musket to find Selectman Mowry an' see what he cud do.... Maounds o' the dead an' the dyin' ... shots an' screams ... shaoutin' in Ol' Squar an' Taown Squar an' New Church Green ... jail throwed open ... proclamation ... treason ... called it the plague when folks come in an' faound haff our people missin' ... nobody left but them as ud jine in with Obed an' them things or else keep quiet ... never heerd o' my pa no more....''  The old man was panting, and perspiring profusely.
His grip on my shoulder tightened.
''Everything cleaned up in the mornin' but they was traces.... Obed he kinder takes charge an' says things is goin' to be changed ... others'll worship with us at meetin' time, an' sarten haouses hez got to entertain guests ... they wanted to mix like they done with the Kanakys, an' he fer one didn't feel baound to stop 'em.
Far gone, was Obed ... jest like a crazy man on the subjeck.
He says they brung us fish an' treasure, an' shud hev what they hankered arter....  ''Nothin' was to be diff'runt on the aoutside, only we was to keep shy o' strangers ef we knowed what was good fer us.
We all hed to take the Oath o' Dagon, an' later on they was secon' an' third Oaths that some of us took.
Them as ud help special, ud git special rewards gold an' sech.
No use balkin', fer they was millions of 'em daown thar.
They'd ruther not start risin' an' wipin' aout humankind, but ef they was gave away an' forced to, they cud do a lot toward jest that.
''Yield up enough sacrifices an' savage knick knacks an' harborage in the taown when they wanted it, an' they'd let well enough alone.
All in the band of the faithful Order o' Dagon an' the children shud never die, but go back to the Mother Hydra an' Father Dagon what we all come from onct Ia!
Ia!
Cthulhu fhtagn!
Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgahnagl fhtagn ''  Old Zadok began to moan now, and tears were coursing down his channelled cheeks into the depths of his beard.
''God, what I seen senct I was fifteen year' old Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin!
the folks as was missin', an' them as kilt theirselves them as told things in Arkham or Ipswich or sech places was all called crazy, like you're a callin' me right naow but God, what I seen they'd a kilt me long ago fer what I know, only I'd took the fust an' secon' Oaths o' Dagon offen Obed, so was pertected unlessen a jury of 'em proved I told things knowin' an' delib'rit ... but I wudn't take the third Oath I'd a died ruther'n take that   ''It got wuss araound Civil War time, when children born senct 'forty six begun to grow up some of 'em, that is.
I was afeard never did no pryin' arter that awful night, an' never see one o' them clost to in all my life.
That is, never no full blooded one.
Barnabas Marsh that runs the refin'ry naow is Obed's grandson by his fust wife son of Onesiphorus, his eldest son, but his mother was another o' them as wa'n't never seed aoutdoors.
''Right naow Barnabas is abaout changed.
Can't shet his eyes no more, an' is all aout o' shape.
They say he still wears clothes, but he'll take to the water soon.''
...
The sound of the incoming tide was now very insistent, and little by little it seemed to change the old man's mood from maudlin tearfulness to watchful fear.
He would pause now and then to renew those nervous glances over his shoulder or out toward the reef, and despite the wild absurdity of his tale, I could not help beginning to share his vague apprehensiveness.
Zadok now grew shriller, and seemed to be trying to whip up his courage with louder speech.
''Hey, yew, why dun't ye say somethin'?
Haow'd ye like to be livin' in a taown like this, with everything a rottin' an' a dyin', an' boarded up monsters crawlin' an' bleatin' an' barkin' an' hoppin' araoun' black cellars an' attics every way ye turn?
Hey?
Wal, Sir, let me tell ye that aint the wust!''
Zadok was really screaming now, and the mad frenzy of his voice disturbed me more than I care to own.
''Curse ye, dun't set thar a starin' at me with them eyes I tell Obed Marsh he's in hell, an' hez got to stay thar!
Heh, heh ... in hell, I says!
Can't git me I hain't done nothin' nor told nobody nothin'   ''Oh, you, young feller?
Wal, even ef I hain't told nobody nothin' yet, I'm a goin' to naow!
Yew jest set still an' listen to me, boy this is what I ain't never told nobody....
I says I didn't get to do no pryin' arter that night but I found things aout jest the same!
''Yew want to know what the reel horror is, hey?
Wal, it's this it ain't what them fish devils hez done, but what they're a goin' to do!
They're a bringin' things up aout o' whar they come from into the taown ben doin' it fer years, an' slackenin' up lately.
Them haouses north o' the river betwixt Water an' Main Streets is full of 'em them devils an' what they brung an' when they git ready ...
I say, when they git ready ... ever hear tell of a shoggoth?....
''Hey, d'ye hear me?
I tell ye I know what them things be I seen 'em one night when.... EH AHHHH AH!
E'YAAHHHH....''  The hideous suddenness and inhuman frightfulness of the old man's shriek almost made me faint.
His eyes, looking past me toward the malodorous sea, were positively starting from his head while his face was a mask of fear worthy of Greek tragedy.
His bony claw dug monstrously into my shoulder, and he made no motion as I turned my head to look at whatever he had glimpsed.
There was nothing that I could see.
Only the incoming tide, with perhaps one set of ripples more local than the long flung line of breakers.
But now Zadok was shaking me, and I turned back to watch the melting of that fear frozen face into a chaos of twitching eyelids and mumbling gums.
Presently his voice came back albeit as a trembling whisper.
''Git aout o' here!
Git aout o' here!
They seen us git aout fer your life!
Dun't wait fer nothin' they know naow Run fer it quick aout o' this taown ''  Another heavy wave dashed against the loosening masonry of the bygone wharf, and changed the mad ancient's whisper to another inhuman and blood curdling scream.
''E YAAAHHHH!...
''YHAAAAAAAA!...''
Before I could recover my scattered wits he had relaxed his clutch on my shoulder and dashed wildly inland toward the street, reeling northward around the ruined warehouse wall.
I glanced back at the sea, but there was nothing there.
And when I reached Water Street and looked along it toward the north there was no remaining trace of Zadok Allen.
I can hardly describe the mood in which I was left by this harrowing episode an episode at once mad and pitiful, grotesque and terrifying.
The grocery boy had prepared me for it, yet the reality left me none the less bewildered and disturbed.
Puerile though the story was, old Zadok's insane earnestness and horror had communicated to me a mounting unrest which joined with my earlier sense of loathing for the town and its blight of intangible shadow.
The hour had grown perilously late my watch said 715, and the Arkham bus left Town Square at eight so I tried to give my thoughts as neutral and practical a cast as possible, meanwhile walking rapidly through the deserted streets of gaping roofs and leaning houses toward the hotel where I had checked my valise and would find my bus.
Studying the grocery youth's map and seeking a route I had not traversed before, I chose Marsh Street instead of State for my approach to Town Square.
Near the corner of Fall Street I began to see scattered groups of furtive whisperers, and when I finally reached the Square I saw that almost all the loiterers were congregated around the door of the Gilman House.
It seemed as if many bulging, watery, unwinking eyes looked oddly at me as I claimed my valise in the lobby, and I hoped that none of these unpleasant creatures would be my fellow passengers on the coach.
The bus, rather early, rattled in with three passengers somewhat before eight, and an evil looking fellow on the sidewalk muttered a few indistinguishable words to the driver.
I was, it appeared, in very bad luck.
There had been something wrong with the engine, despite the excellent time made from Newburyport, and the bus could not complete the journey to Arkham.
No, it could not possibly be repaired that night, nor was there any other way of getting transportation out of Innsmouth, either to Arkham or elsewhere.
Sargent was sorry, but I would have to stop over at the Gilman.
Probably the clerk would make the price easy for me, but there was nothing else to do.
Almost dazed by this sudden obstacle, and violently dreading the fall of night in this decaying and half unlighted town, I left the bus and reentered the hotel lobby where the sullen, queer looking night clerk told me I could have Room 428 on next the top floor large, but without running water for a dollar.
Despite what I had heard of this hotel in Newburyport, I signed the register, paid my dollar, let the clerk take my valise, and followed that sour, solitary attendant up three creaking flights of stairs past dusty corridors which seemed wholly devoid of life.
My room, a dismal rear one with two windows and bare, cheap furnishings, over looked a dingy courtyard otherwise hemmed in by low, deserted brick blocks, and commanded a view of decrepit westward stretching roofs with a marshy countryside beyond.
At the end of the corridor was a bathroom a discouraging relique with ancient marble bowl, tin tub, faint electric light, and musty wooden panelling around all the plumbing fixtures.
As twilight deepened I turned on the one feeble electric bulb over the cheap, iron framed bed, and tried as best I could to read.
I felt it advisable to keep my mind wholesomely occupied, for it would not do to brood over the abnormalities of this ancient, blight shadowed town while I was still within its borders.
The insane yarn I had heard from the aged drunkard did not promise very pleasant dreams, and I felt I must keep the image of his wild, watery eyes as far as possible from my imagination.
Another thing that disturbed me was the absence of a bolt on the door of my room.
One had been there, as marks clearly showed, but there were signs of recent removal.
No doubt it had become out of order, like so many other things in this decrepit edifice.
In my nervousness I looked around and discovered a bolt on the clothespress which seemed to be of the same size, judging from the marks, as the one formerly on the door.
To gain a partial relief from the general tension I busied myself by transferring this hardware to the vacant place with the aid of a handy three in one device including a screw driver which I kept on my keyring.
The bolt fitted perfectly, and I was somewhat relieved when I knew that I could shoot it firmly upon retiring.
There were adequate bolts on the two lateral doors to connecting rooms, and these I proceeded to fasten.
I did not undress, but decided to read till I was sleepy and then lie down with only my coat, collar, and shoes off.
Taking a pocket flashlight from my valise, I placed it in my trousers, so that I could read my watch if I woke up later in the dark.
Drowsiness, however, did not come and when I stopped to analyze my thoughts I found to my disquiet that I was really unconsciously listening for something listening for something which I dreaded but could not name.
At length, feeling a fatigue which had nothing of drowsiness in it, I bolted the newly outfitted hall door, turned off the light, and threw myself down on the hard, uneven bed coat, collar, shoes, and all.
In the darkness every faint noise of the night seemed magnified, and a flood of doubly unpleasant thoughts swept over me.
I was sorry I had put out the light, yet was too tired to rise and turn it on again.
Then, after a long, dreary interval, and prefaced by a fresh creaking of stairs and corridor, there came that soft, damnably unmistakable sound which seemed like a malign fulfilment of all my apprehensions.
Without the least shadow of a doubt, the lock on my hall door was being tried cautiously, furtively, tentatively with a key.
The change in the menace from vague premonition to immediate reality was a profound shock, and fell upon me with the force of a genuine blow.
It never once occurred to me that the fumbling might be a mere mistake.
Malign purpose was all I could think of, and I kept deathly quiet, awaiting the would be intruder's next move.
After a time the cautious rattling ceased, and I heard the room to the north entered with a pass key.
Then the lock of the connecting door to my room was softly tried.
The bolt held, of course, and I heard the floor creak as the prowler left the room.
After a moment there came another soft rattling, and I knew that the room to the south of me was being entered.
Again a furtive trying of a bolted connecting door, and again a receding creaking.
This time the creaking went along the hall and down the stairs, so I knew that the prowler had realized the bolted condition of my doors and was giving up his attempt for a time.
The one thing to do was to get out of that hotel alive as quickly as I could, and through some channel other than the front stairs and lobby!
Rising softly and throwing my flashlight on the switch, I sought to light the bulb over my bed in order to choose and pocket some belongings for a swift, valiseless flight.
Nothing, however, happened and I saw that the power had been cut off.
So, filling my pockets with the flashlight's aid, I put on my hat and tiptoed to the windows to consider chances of descent.
Despite the state's safety regulations there was no fire escape on this side of the hotel, and I saw that my windows commanded only a sheer three story drop to the cobbled courtyard.
On the right and left, however, some ancient brick business blocks abutted on the hotel their slant roofs coming up to a reasonable jumping distance from my fourth story level.
To reach either of these lines of buildings I would have to be in a room two doors from my own in one case on the north and in the other case on the south and my mind instantly set to work calculating what chances I had of making the transfer.
First, I reinforced my own outer door by pushing the bureau against it little by little, in order to make a minimum of sound.
Then, gathering from the grocery boy's map that the best route out of town was southward, I glanced first at the connecting door on the south side of the room.
It was designed to open in my direction, hence I saw after drawing the bolt and finding other fastenings in place it was not a favorable one for forcing.
Accordingly abandoning it as a route, I cautiously moved the bedstead against it to hamper any attack which might be made on it later from the next room.
The door on the north was hung to open away from me, and this though a test proved it to be locked or bolted from the other side I knew must be my route.
If I could gain the roofs of the buildings in Paine Street and descend successfully to the ground level, I might perhaps dart through the courtyard and the adjacent or opposite buildings to Washington or Bates or else emerge in Paine and edge around southward into Washington.
In any case, I would aim to strike Washington somehow and get quickly out of the Town Square region.
My preference would be to avoid Paine, since the fire station there might be open all night.
I was irresolutely speculating on when I had better attack the northward door, and on how I could least audibly manage it, when I noticed that the vague noises underfoot had given place to a fresh and heavier creaking of the stairs.
A wavering flicker of light showed through my transom, and the boards of the corridor began to groan with a ponderous load.
Muffled sounds of possible vocal origin approached, and at length a firm knock came at my outer door.
For a moment I simply held my breath and waited.
Eternities seemed to elapse, and the nauseous fishy odor of my environment seemed to mount suddenly and spectacularly.
Then the knocking was repeated continuously, and with growing insistence.
I knew that the time for action had come, and forthwith drew the bolt of the northward connecting door, bracing myself for the task of battering it open.
The knocking waxed louder, and I hoped that its volume would cover the sound of my efforts.
At last beginning my attempt, I lunged again and again at the thin panelling with my left shoulder, heedless of shock or pain.
Finally the connecting door gave, but with such a crash that I knew those outside must have heard.
Instantly the outside knocking became a violent battering, while keys sounded ominously in the hall doors of the rooms on both sides of me.
Rushing through the newly opened connection, I succeeded in bolting the northerly hall door before the lock could be turned but even as I did so I heard the hall door of the third room the one from whose window I had hoped to reach the roof below being tried with a pass key.
For an instant I felt absolute despair, since my trapping in a chamber with no window egress seemed complete.
Then, with a dazed automatism, I made for the next connecting door and performed the blind motion of pushing at it in an effort to get through!
Sheer fortunate chance gave me my reprieve for the connecting door before me was not only unlocked but actually ajar.
In a second I was through, and had my right knee and shoulder against a hall door which was visibly opening inward.
My pressure took the opener off guard, for the thing shut as I pushed, so that I could slip the well conditioned bolt as I had done with the other door.
As I gained this respite I heard the battering at the two other doors abate, while a confused clatter came from the connecting door I had shielded with the bedstead.
Evidently the bulk of my assailants had entered the southerly room and were massing in a lateral attack.
But at the same moment a pass key sounded in the next door to the north, and I knew that a nearer peril was at hand.
The northward connecting door was wide open, but there was no time to think about checking the already turning lock in the hall.
All I could do was to shut and bolt the open connecting door, as well as its mate on the opposite side pushing a bedstead against the one and a bureau against the other, and moving a washstand in front of the hall door.
I must, I saw, trust to such makeshift barriers to shield me till I could get out the window and on the roof of the Paine Street block.
But even in this acute moment my chief horror was something apart from the immediate weakness of my defenses.
I was shuddering because not one of my pursuers, despite some hideous pantings, gruntings, and subdued barkings at odd intervals, was uttering an intelligible vocal sound!
As I moved the furniture and rushed toward the windows I heard a frightful scurrying along the corridor toward the room north of me, and perceived that the southward battering had ceased.
Plainly, most of my opponents were about to concentrate against the feeble connecting door which they knew must open directly on me.
Outside, the moon played on the ridge pole of the block below, and I saw that the jump would be desperately hazardous because of the steep surface on which I must land.
The clatter at the northerly connecting door was now terrific, and I saw that the weak panelling was beginning to splinter.
Obviously, the besiegers had brought some ponderous object into play as a battering ram.
The bedstead, however, still held firm so that I had at least a faint chance of making good my escape.
As I opened the window I noticed that it was flanked by heavy velour draperies suspended from a pole by brass rings, and also that there was a large projecting catch for the shutters on the exterior.
Seeing a possible means of avoiding the dangerous jump, I yanked at the hangings and brought them down, pole and all then quickly hooking two of the rings in the shutter catch and flinging the drapery outside.
The heavy folds reached fully to the abutting roof, and I saw that the rings and catch would be likely to bear my weight.
So, climbing out of the window and down the improvised rope ladder, I left behind me forever the morbid and horror infested fabric of the Gilman House.
I landed safely on the loose slates of the steep roof, and succeeded in gaining the gaping black skylight without a slip.
The place inside was ghoulish looking, but I was past minding such impressions and made at once for the staircase revealed by my flashlight after a hasty glance at my watch, which showed the hour to be 2 A.M.
The steps creaked, but seemed tolerably sound and I raced down past a barnlike second story to the ground floor.
The desolation was complete, and only echoes answered my footfalls.
The hallway inside was black, and when I reached the opposite end I saw that the street door was wedged immovably shut.
Resolved to try another building, I groped my way toward the courtyard, but stopped short when close to the doorway.
For out of an opened door in the Gilman House a large crowd of doubtful shapes was pouring lanterns bobbing in the darkness, and horrible croaking voices exchanging low cries in what was certainly not English.
Their features were indistinguishable, but their crouching, shambling gait was abominably repellent.
And worst of all, I perceived that one figure was strangely robed, and unmistakably surmounted by a tall tiara of a design altogether too familiar.
Again groping toward the street, I opened a door off the hall and came upon an empty room with closely shuttered but sashless windows.
Fumbling in the rays of my flashlight, I found I could open the shutters and in another moment had climbed outside and was carefully closing the aperture in its original manner.
I walked rapidly, softly, and close to the ruined houses.
At Bates Street I drew into a yawning vestibule while two shambling figures crossed in front of me, but was soon on my way again and approaching the open space where Eliot Street obliquely crosses Washington at the intersection of South.
Though I had never seen this space, it had looked dangerous to me on the grocery youth's map since the moonlight would have free play there.
There was no use trying to evade it, for any alternative course would involve detours of possibly disastrous visibility and delaying effect.
The only thing to do was to cross it boldly and openly imitating the typical shamble of the Innsmouth folk as best I could, and trusting that no one or at least no pursuer of mine would be there.
Just how fully the pursuit was organized and indeed, just what its purpose might be I could form no idea.
There seemed to be unusual activity in the town, but I judged that the news of my escape from the Gilman had not yet spread.
The open space was, as I had expected, strongly moonlit.
But my progress was unimpeded, and no fresh sound arose to hint that I had been spied.
Glancing about me, I involuntarily let my pace slacken for a second to take in the sight of the sea, gorgeous in the burning moonlight at the street's end.
Far out beyond the breakwater was the dim, dark line of Devil Reef.
Then, without warning, I saw the intermittent flashes of light on the distant reef.
My muscles tightened for panic flight, held in only by a certain unconscious caution and half hypnotic fascination.
And to make matters worse, there now flashed forth from the lofty cupola of the Gilman House, which loomed up to the northeast behind me, a series of analogous though differently spaced gleams which could be nothing less than an answering signal.
I now bent to the left around the ruinous green still gazing toward the ocean as it blazed in the spectral summer moonlight, and watching the cryptical flashing of those nameless, unexplainable beacons.
It was then that the most horrible impression of all was borne in upon me the impression which destroyed my last vestige of self control and sent me running frantically southward past the yawning black doorways and fishily staring windows of that deserted nightmare street.
For at a closer glance I saw that the moonlit waters between the reef and the shore were far from empty.
They were alive with a teeming horde of shapes swimming inward toward the town!
My frantic running ceased before I had covered a block, for at my left I began to hear something like the hue and cry of organized pursuit.
There were footsteps and guttural sounds, and a rattling motor wheezed south along Federal Street.
In a second all my plans were utterly changed for if the southward highway were blocked ahead of me, I must clearly find another egress from Innsmouth.
I paused and drew into a gaping doorway, reflecting how lucky I was to have left the moonlit open space before these pursuers came down the parallel street.
Then I thought of the abandoned railway to Rowley, whose solid line of ballasted, weed grown earth still stretched off to the northwest from the crumbling station on the edge of the river gorge.
There was just a chance that the townsfolk would not think of that!
Drawing inside the hall of my deserted shelter, I once more consulted the grocery boy's map with the aid of the flashlight.
The immediate problem was how to reach the ancient railway and I now saw that the safest course was ahead to Babson Street, then west to Lafayette there edging around but not crossing an open space homologous to the one I had traversed and subsequently back northward and westward in zigzagging line through Lafayette, Bates, Adams, and Banks Streets the latter skirting the river gorge to the abandoned and dilapidated station I had seen from my window.
My reason for going ahead to Babson was that I wished neither to re cross the earlier open space nor to begin my westward course along a cross street as broad as South.
I crossed the street to the right hand side in order to edge around into Babson as inconspicuously as possible.
In Babson Street I clung as closely as possible to the sagging, uneven buildings twice pausing in a doorway as the noises behind me momentarily increased.
The open space ahead shone wide and desolate under the moon, but my route would not force me to cross it.
During my second pause I began to detect a fresh distribution of the vague sounds and upon looking cautiously out from cover beheld a motor car darting across the open space, bound outward along Eliot Street.
As I watched choked by a sudden rise in the fishy odor after a short abatement I saw a band of uncouth, crouching shapes loping and shambling in the same direction and knew that this must be the party guarding the Ipswich road, since that highway forms an extension of Eliot Street.
Two of the figures I glimpsed were in voluminous robes, and one wore a peaked diadem which glistened whitely in the moonlight.
The gait of this figure was so odd that it sent a chill through me for it seemed to me the creature was almost hopping.
When the last of the band was out of sight I resumed my progress darting around the corner into Lafayette Street, and crossing Eliot very hurriedly lest stragglers of the party be still advancing along that thoroughfare.
I did hear some croaking and clattering sounds far off toward Town Square, but accomplished the passage without disaster.
My greatest dread was in re crossing broad and moonlit South Street with its seaward view and I had to nerve myself for the ordeal.
Someone might easily be looking, and possible Eliot Street stragglers could not fail to glimpse me from either of two points.
At the last moment I decided I had better slacken my trot and make the crossing as before in the shambling gait of an average Innsmouth native.
I had not quite crossed the street when I heard a muttering band advancing along Washington from the north.
As they reached the broad open space where I had had my first disquieting glimpse of the moonlit water I could see them plainly only a block away and was horrified by the bestial abnormality of their faces and the dog like sub humanness of their crouching gait.
One man moved in a positively simian way, with long arms frequently touching the ground while another figure robed and tiaraed seemed to progress in an almost hopping fashion.
I judged this party to be the one I had seen in the Gilman's courtyard the one, therefore, most closely on my trail.
As some of the figures turned to look in my direction I was transfixed with fright, yet managed to preserve the casual, shambling gait I had assumed.
To this day I do not know whether they saw me or not.
If they did, my stratagem must have deceived them, for they passed on across the moonlit space without varying their course meanwhile croaking and jabbering in some hateful guttural patois I could not identify.
Once more in shadow, I resumed my former dog trot past the leaning and decrepit houses that stared blankly into the night.
Having crossed to the western sidewalk I rounded the nearest corner into Bates Street, where I kept close to the buildings on the southern side.
At last I saw the ancient arcaded station or what was left of it and made directly for the tracks that started from its farther end.
The rails were rusty but mainly intact, and not more than half the ties had rotted away.
Walking or running on such a surface was very difficult but I did my best, and on the whole made very fair time.
For some distance the line kept on along the gorge's brink, but at length I reached the long covered bridge where it crossed the chasm at a dizzy height.
The condition of this bridge would determine my next step.
If humanly possible, I would use it if not, I would have to risk more street wandering and take the nearest intact highway bridge.
The vast, barnlike length of the old bridge gleamed spectrally in the moonlight and I saw that the ties were safe for at least a few feet within.
Entering, I began to use my flashlight, and was almost knocked down by the cloud of bats that flapped past me.
About halfway across there was a perilous gap in the ties which I feared for a moment would halt me but in the end I risked a desperate jump which fortunately succeeded.
I was glad to see the moonlight again when I emerged from that macabre tunnel.
The old tracks crossed River Street at a grade, and at once veered off into a region increasingly rural and with less and less of Innsmouth's abhorrent fishy odor.
Here the dense growth of weeds and briers hindered me and cruelly tore my clothes, but I was none the less glad that they were there to give me concealment in case of peril.
I knew that much of my route must be visible from the Rowley road.
The marshy region began very shortly, with the single track on a low, grassy embankment.
Then came a sort of island of higher ground, where the line passed through a shallow open cut choked with bushes and brambles.
I was very glad of this partial shelter, since at this point the Rowley road was uncomfortably near according to my window view.
Just before entering the cut I glanced behind me, but saw no pursuer.
The ancient spires and roofs of decaying Innsmouth gleamed lovely and ethereal in the magic yellow moonlight, and I thought of how they must have looked in the old days before the shadow fell.
Then, as my gaze circled inland from the town, something less tranquil arrested my notice and held me immobile for a second.
What I saw or fancied I saw was a disturbing suggestion of undulant motion far to the south a suggestion which made me conclude that a very large horde must be pouring out of the city along the level Ipswich road.
The distance was great, and I could distinguish nothing in detail but I did not at all like the look of that moving column.
All sorts of unpleasant conjectures crossed my mind.
I thought of those very extreme Innsmouth types said to be hidden in crumbling, centuried warrens near the waterfront.
I thought, too, of those nameless swimmers I had seen.
Counting the parties so far glimpsed, as well as those presumably covering other roads, the number of my pursuers must be strangely large for a town as depopulated as Innsmouth.
Who were they?
Why were they here?
And if such a column of them was scouring the Ipswich road, would the patrols on the other roads be likewise augmented?
I had entered the brush grown cut and was struggling along at a very slow pace when that damnable fishy odor again waxed dominant.
There were sounds, too a kind of wholesale, colossal flopping or pattering which somehow called up images of the most detestable sort.
And then both stench and sounds grew stronger, so that I paused shivering and grateful for the cut's protection.
It was here, I recalled, that the Rowley road drew so close to the old railway before crossing westward and diverging.
Something was coming along that road, and I must lie low till its passage and vanishment in the distance.
Crouched in the bushes of that sandy cleft I felt reasonably safe, even though I knew the searchers would have to cross the track in front of me not much more than a hundred yards away.
I would be able to see them, but they could not, except by a malign miracle, see me.
All at once I began dreading to look at them as they passed.
I saw the close moonlit space where they would surge by, and had curious thoughts about the irredeemable pollution of that space.
They would perhaps be the worst of all Innsmouth types something one would not care to remember.
The stench waxed overpowering, and the noises swelled to a bestial babel of croaking, baying, and barking, without the least suggestion of human speech.
Were these indeed the voices of my pursuers?
That flopping or pattering was monstrous I could not look upon the degenerate creatures responsible for it.
I would keep my eyes shut till the sounds receded toward the west.
The horde was very close now the air foul with their hoarse snarlings, and the ground almost shaking with their alien rhythmed footfalls.
My breath nearly ceased to come, and I put every ounce of will power into the task of holding my eyelids down.
I am not even yet willing to say whether what followed was a hideous actuality or only a nightmare hallucination.
The later action of the government, after my frantic appeals, would tend to confirm it as a monstrous truth but could not an hallucination have been repeated under the quasi hypnotic spell of that ancient, haunted, and shadowed town?
But I must try to tell what I thought I saw that night under the mocking yellow moon saw surging and hopping down the Rowley road in plain sight in front of me as I crouched among the wild brambles of that desolate railway cut.
Of course my resolution to keep my eyes shut had failed.
It was foredoomed to failure for who could crouch blindly while a legion of croaking, baying entities of unknown source flopped noisomely past, scarcely more than a hundred yards away?
For I knew that a long section of them must be plainly in sight where the sides of the cut flattened out and the road crossed the track and I could no longer keep myself from sampling whatever horror that leering yellow moon might have to show.
It was the end, for whatever remains to me of life on the surface of this earth, of every vestige of mental peace and confidence in the integrity of nature and of the human mind.
Can it be possible that this planet has actually spawned such things that human eyes have truly seen, as objective flesh, what man has hitherto known only in febrile phantasy and tenuous legend?
And yet I saw them in a limitless stream flopping, hopping, croaking, bleating surging inhumanly through the spectral moonlight in a grotesque, malignant saraband of fantastic nightmare.
And some of them had tall tiaras of that nameless whitish gold metal ... and some were strangely robed ... and one, who led the way, was clad in a ghoulishly humped black coat and striped trousers, and had a man's felt hat perched on the shapeless thing that answered for a head....
I think their predominant color was a grayish green, though they had white bellies.
They were mostly shiny and slippery, but the ridges of their backs were scaly.
Their forms vaguely suggested the anthropoid, while their heads were the heads of fish, with prodigious bulging eyes that never closed.
At the sides of their necks were palpitating gills, and their long paws were webbed.
They hopped irregularly, sometimes on two legs and sometimes on four.
I was somehow glad that they had no more than four limbs.
Their croaking, baying voices, clearly used for articulate speech, held all the dark shades of expression which their staring faces lacked.
But for all of their monstrousness they were not unfamiliar to me.
I knew too well what they must be for was not the memory of that evil tiara at Newburyport still fresh?
They were the blasphemous fish frogs of the nameless design living and horrible and as I saw them I knew also of what that humped, tiaraed priest in the black church basement had so fearsomely reminded me.
Their number was past guessing.
It seemed to me that there were limitless swarms of them and certainly my momentary glimpse could have shown only the least fraction.
In another instant everything was blotted out by a merciful fit of fainting the first I had ever had.
It was a gentle daylight rain that awaked me from my stupor in the brush grown railway cut, and when I staggered out to the roadway ahead I saw no trace of any prints in the fresh mud.
Innsmouth's ruined roofs and toppling steeples loomed up grayly toward the southeast, but not a living creature did I spy in all the desolate salt marshes around.
My watch was still going, and told me that the hour was past noon.
The reality of what I had been through was highly uncertain in my mind, but I felt that something hideous lay in the background.
I must get away from evil shadowed Innsmouth and accordingly I began to test my cramped, wearied powers of locomotion.
Despite weakness, hunger, horror, and bewilderment I found myself after a time able to walk so started slowly along the muddy road to Rowley.
Before evening I was in the village, getting a meal and providing myself with presentable clothes.
I caught the night train to Arkham, and the next day talked long and earnestly with government officials there a process I later repeated in Boston.
With the main result of these colloquies the public is now familiar and I wish, for normality's sake, there were nothing more to tell.
Perhaps it is madness that is overtaking me yet perhaps a greater horror or a greater marvel is reaching out.
I dared not look for that piece of strange jewelry said to be in the Miskatonic University Museum.
I did, however, improve my stay in Arkham by collecting some genealogical notes I had long wished to possess very rough and hasty data, it is true, but capable of good use later on when I might have time to collate and codify them.
The curator of the historical society there Mr. E. Lapham Peabody was very courteous about assisting me, and expressed unusual interest when I told him I was a grandson of Eliza Orne of Arkham, who was born in 1867 and had married James Williamson of Ohio at the age of seventeen.
It seemed that a maternal uncle of mine had been there many years before on a quest much like my own and that my grandmother's family was a topic of some local curiosity.
There had, Mr. Peabody said, been considerable discussion about the marriage of her father, Benjamin Orne, just after the Civil War since the ancestry of the bride was peculiarly puzzling.
That bride was understood to have been an orphaned Marsh of New Hampshire a cousin of the Essex County Marshes but her education had been in France and she knew very little of her family.
A guardian had deposited funds in a Boston bank to maintain her and her French governess but that guardian's name was unfamiliar to Arkham people, and in time he dropped out of sight, so that the governess assumed his role by court appointment.
The French woman now long dead was very taciturn, and there were those who said she could have told more than she did.
But the most baffling thing was the inability of anyone to place the recorded parents of the young woman Enoch and Lydia Meserve Marsh among the known families of New Hampshire.
Possibly, many suggested, she was the natural daughter of some Marsh of prominence she certainly had the true Marsh eyes.
Most of the puzzling was done after her early death, which took place at the birth of my grandmother her only child.
Having formed some disagreeable impressions connected with the name of Marsh, I did not welcome the news that it belonged on my own ancestral tree nor was I pleased by Mr. Peabody's suggestion that I had the true Marsh eyes myself.
However, I was grateful for data which I knew would prove valuable and took copious notes and lists of book references regarding the well documented Orne family.
I went directly home to Toledo from Boston, and later spent a month at Maumee recuperating from my ordeal.
In September I entered Oberlin for my final year, and from then till the next June was busy with studies and other wholesome activities reminded of the bygone terror only by occasional official visits from government men in connection with the campaign which my pleas and evidence had started.
Around the middle of July just a year after the Innsmouth experience I spent a week with my late mother's family in Cleveland checking some of my new genealogical data with the various notes, traditions, and bits of heirloom material in existence there, and seeing what kind of a connected chart I could construct.
I did not exactly relish this task, for the atmosphere of the Williamson home had always depressed me.
There was a strain of morbidity there, and my mother had never encouraged my visiting her parents as a child, although she always welcomed her father when he came to Toledo.
My Arkham born grandmother had seemed strange and almost terrifying to me, and I do not think I grieved when she disappeared.
I was eight years old then, and it was said that she had wandered off in grief after the suicide of my uncle Douglas, her eldest son.
He had shot himself after a trip to New England the same trip, no doubt, which had caused him to be recalled at the Arkham Historical Society.
This uncle had resembled her, and I had never liked him either.
Something about the staring, unwinking expression of both of them had given me a vague, unaccountable uneasiness.
My mother and uncle Walter had not looked like that.
They were like their father, though poor little cousin Lawrence Walter's son had been an almost perfect duplicate of his grandmother before his condition took him to the permanent seclusion of a sanitarium at Canton.
I had not seen him in four years, but my uncle once implied that his state, both mental and physical, was very bad.
This worry had probably been a major cause of his mother's death two years before.
My grandfather and his widowered son Walter now comprised the Cleveland household, but the memory of older times hung thickly over it.
I still disliked the place, and tried to get my researches done as quickly as possible.
Williamson records and traditions were supplied in abundance by my grandfather though for Orne material I had to depend on my uncle Walter, who put at my disposal the contents of all his files, including notes, letters, cuttings, heirlooms, photographs, and miniatures.
It was in going over the letters and pictures on the Orne side that I began to acquire a kind of terror of my own ancestry.
As I have said, my grandmother and uncle Douglas had always disturbed me.
Now, years after their passing, I gazed at their pictured faces with a measurably heightened feeling of repulsion and alienation.
I could not at first understand the change, but gradually a horrible sort of comparison began to obtrude itself on my unconscious mind despite the steady refusal of my consciousness to admit even the least suspicion of it.
It was clear that the typical expression of these faces now suggested something it had not suggested before something which would bring stark panic if too openly thought of.
But the worst shock came when my uncle showed me the Orne jewelry in a downtown safe deposit vault.
Some of the items were delicate and inspiring enough, but there was one box of strange old pieces descended from my mysterious great grandmother which my uncle was almost reluctant to produce.
They were, he said, of very grotesque and almost repulsive design.
As my uncle began slowly and grudgingly to unwrap the things, he urged me not to be shocked by the strangeness and frequent hideousness of the designs.
There were two armlets, a tiara, and a kind of pectoral the latter having in high relief certain figures of almost unbearable extravagance.
He seemed to expect some demonstration when the first piece the tiara became visible, but I doubt if he expected quite what actually happened.
I did not expect it, either, for I thought I was thoroughly forewarned regarding what the jewelry would turn out to be.
What I did was to faint silently away just as I had done in that brier choked railway cut a year before.
From that day on my life has been a nightmare of brooding and apprehension, nor do I know how much is hideous truth and how much madness.
My great grandmother had been a Marsh of unknown source whose husband lived in Arkham and did not old Zadok say that the daughter of Obed Marsh by a monstrous mother was married to an Arkham man through a trick?
What was it the ancient toper had muttered about the likeness of my eyes to Captain Obed's?
In Arkham, too, the curator had told me I had the true Marsh eyes.
Was Obed Marsh my own great great grandfather?
Who or what then, was my great great grandmother?
But perhaps this was all madness.
Those whitish gold ornaments might easily have been bought from some Innsmouth sailor by the father of my great grandmother, whoever he was.
And that look in the staring eyed faces of my grandmother and self slain uncle might be sheer fancy, bolstered up by the Innsmouth shadow which had so darkly colored my imagination.
But why had my uncle killed himself after an ancestral quest in New England?
For more than two years I fought off these reflections with partial success.
My father secured me a place in an insurance office, and I buried myself in routine as deeply as possible.
In the winter of 1930 31, however, the dreams began.
They were very sparse and insidious at first, but increased in frequency and vividness as the weeks went by.
Great watery spaces opened out before me, and I seemed to wander through titanic sunken porticos and labyrinths of weedy cyclopean walls and grotesque fishes as my companions.
Then the other shapes began to appear, filling me with nameless horror the moment I awoke.
But during the dreams they did not horrify me at all I was one with them wearing their unhuman trappings, treading their aqueous ways, and praying monstrously at their evil sea bottom temples.
There was much more than I could remember, but even what I did remember each morning would be enough to stamp me as a madman or a genius if ever I dared write it down.
Some frightful influence, I felt, was seeking gradually to drag me out of the sane world of wholesome life into unnameable abysses of blackness and alienage and the process told heavily on me.
My health and appearance grew steadily worse, till finally I was forced to give up my position and adopt the static, secluded life of an invalid.
Some odd nervous affliction had me in its grip, and I found myself at times almost unable to shut my eyes.
It was then that I began to study the mirror with mounting alarm.
The slow ravages of disease are not pleasant to watch, but in my case there was something subtler and more puzzling in the background.
My father seemed to notice it, too, for he began looking at me curiously and almost affrightedly.
What was taking place in me?
Could it be that I was coming to resemble my grandmother and uncle Douglas?
One night I had a frightful dream in which I met my grandmother under the sea.
She lived in a phosphorescent palace of many terraces, with gardens of strange leprous corals and grotesque brachiate efflorescences, and welcomed me with a warmth that may have been sardonic.
She had changed as those who take to the water change and told me she had never died.
Instead, she had gone to a spot her dead son had learned about, and had leaped to a realm whose wonders destined for him as well he had spurned with a smoking pistol.
This was to be my realm, too I could not escape it.
I would never die, but would live with those who had lived since before man ever walked the earth.
Illustration ''One night, in a frightful dream, I met two Ancient Ones under the sea in a phosphorescent, many terraced palace surrounded by gardens of strange, leprous corals.''
I met also that which had been her grandmother.
For eighty thousand years Pth'thya l'yi had lived in Y'ha nthlei, and thither she had gone back after Obed Marsh was dead.
Y'ha nthlei was not destroyed when the upper earth men shot death into the sea.
It was hurt, but not destroyed.
The Deep Ones could never be destroyed, even though the palaeogean magic of the forgotten Old Ones might sometimes check them.
For the present they would rest but some day, if they remembered, they would rise again for the tribute Great Cthulhu craved.
It would be a city greater than Innsmouth next time.
They had planned to spread, and had brought up that which would help them, but now they must wait once more.
For bringing the upper earth men's death I must do a penance, but that would not be heavy.
This was the dream in which I saw a shoggoth for the first time, and the sight set me awake in a frenzy of screaming.
That morning the mirror definitely told me I had acquired the Innsmouth look.
So far I have not shot myself as my uncle Douglas did.
I bought an automatic and almost took the step, but certain dreams deterred me.
The tense extremes of horror are lessening, and I feel queerly drawn toward the unknown sea deeps instead of fearing them.
I hear and do strange things in sleep, and awake with a kind of exaltation instead of terror.
I do not believe I need to wait for the full change as most have waited.
If I did, my father would probably shut me up in a sanitarium as my poor little cousin is shut up.
Stupendous and unheard of splendors await me below, and I shall seek them soon.
Ia R'lyeh!
Cthulhu fhtagn!
Ia!
Ia!
No, I shall not shoot myself I cannot be made to shoot myself!
I shall plan my cousin's escape from that Canton madhouse, and together we shall go to marvel shadowed Innsmouth.
We shall swim out to that brooding reef in the sea and dive down through black abysses to cyclopean and many columned Y'ha nthlei, and in that lair of the Deep Ones we shall dwell amidst wonder and glory forever.
When a traveler in north central Massachusetts takes the wrong fork at the junction of the Aylesbury pike just beyond Dean's Corners he comes upon a lonely and curious country.
The ground gets higher, and the brier bordered stone walls press closer and closer against the ruts of the dusty, curving road.
The trees of the frequent forest belts seem too large, and the wild weeds, brambles, and grasses attain a luxuriance not often found in settled regions.
At the same time the planted fields appear singularly few and barren while the sparsely scattered houses wear a surprizing uniform aspect of age, squalor, and dilapidation.
Without knowing why, one hesitates to ask directions from the gnarled, solitary figures spied now and then on crumbling doorsteps or in the sloping, rock strewn meadows.
Those figures are so silent and furtive that one feels somehow confronted by forbidden things, with which it would be better to have nothing to do.
When a rise in the road brings the mountains in view above the deep woods, the feeling of strange uneasiness is increased.
The summits are too rounded and symmetrical to give a sense of comfort and naturalness, and sometimes the sky silhouettes with especial clearness the queer circles of tall stone pillars with which most of them are crowned.
Gorges and ravines of problematical depth intersect the way, and the crude wooden bridges always seem of dubious safety.
When the road dips again there are stretches of marshland that one instinctively dislikes, and indeed almost fears at evening when unseen whippoorwills chatter and the fireflies come out in abnormal profusion to dance to the raucous, creepily insistent rhythms of stridently piping bullfrogs.
The thin, shining line of the Miskatonic's upper reaches has an oddly serpentlike suggestion as it winds close to the feet of the domed hills among which it rises.
As the hills draw nearer, one heeds their wooded sides more than their stone crowned tops.
Those sides loom up so darkly and precipitously that one wishes they would keep their distance, but there is no road by which to escape them.
Across a covered bridge one sees a small village huddled between the stream and the vertical slope of Round Mountain, and wonders at the cluster of rotting gambrel roofs bespeaking an earlier architectural period than that of the neighboring region.
It is not reassuring to see, on a closer glance, that most of the houses are deserted and falling to ruin, and that the broken steepled church now harbors the one slovenly mercantile establishment of the hamlet.
One dreads to trust the tenebrous tunnel of the bridge, yet there is no way to avoid it.
Once across, it is hard to prevent the impression of a faint, malign odor about the village street, as of the massed mold and decay of centuries.
It is always a relief to get clear of the place, and to follow the narrow road around the base of the hills and across the level country beyond till it rejoins the Aylesbury pike.
Afterward one sometimes learns that one has been through Dunwich.
Outsiders visit Dunwich as seldom as possible, and since a certain season of horror all the signboards pointing toward it have been taken down.
The scenery, judged by any ordinary esthetic canon, is more than commonly beautiful yet there is no influx of artists or summer tourists.
Two centuries ago, when talk of witch blood, Satan worship, and strange forest presences was not laughed at, it was the custom to give reasons for avoiding the locality.
In our sensible age since the Dunwich horror of 1928 was hushed up by those who had the town's and the world's welfare at heart people shun it without knowing exactly why.
Perhaps one reason though it can not apply to uninformed strangers is that the natives are now repellently decadent, having gone far along that path of retrogression so common in many New England backwaters.
They have come to form a race by themselves, with the well defined mental and physical stigmata of degeneracy and inbreeding.
The average of their intelligence is wofully low, whilst their annals reek of overt viciousness and of half hidden murders, incests, and deeds of almost unnamable violence and perversity.
The old gentry, representing the two or three armigerous families which came from Salem in 1692, have kept somewhat above the general level of decay though many branches are sunk into the sordid populace so deeply that only their names remain as a key to the origin they disgrace.
Some of the Whateleys and Bishops still send their eldest sons to Harvard and Miskatonic, though those sons seldom return to the moldering gambrel roofs under which they and their ancestors were born.
No one, even those who have the facts concerning the recent horror, can say just what is the matter with Dunwich though old legends speak of unhallowed rites and conclaves of the Indians, amidst which they called forbidden shapes of shadow out of the great rounded hills, and made wild orgiastic prayers that were answered by loud crackings and rumblings from the ground below.
In 1747 the Reverend Abijah Hoadley, newly come to the Congregational Church at Dunwich Village, preached a memorable sermon on the close presence of Satan and his imps, in which he said  It must be allow'd that these Blasphemies of an infernall Train of Daemons are Matters of too common Knowledge to be deny'd the cursed Voices of Azazel and Buzrael, of Beelzebub and Belial, being heard from under Ground by above a Score of credible Witnesses now living.
I myself did not more than a Fortnight ago catch a very plain Discourse of evill Powers in the Hill behind my House wherein there were a Rattling and Rolling, Groaning, Screeching, and Hissing, such as no Things of this Earth cou'd raise up, and which must needs have come from those Caves that only black Magick can discover, and only the Divell unlock.
Mr. Hoadley disappeared soon after delivering this sermon but the text, printed in Springfield, is still extant.
Noises in the hills continued to be reported from year to year, and still form a puzzle to geologists and physiographers.
Other traditions tell of foul odors near the hill crowning circles of stone pillars, and of rushing airy presences to be heard faintly at certain hours from stated points at the bottom of the great ravines while still others try to explain the Devil's Hop Yard a bleak, blasted hillside where no tree, shrub, or grass blade will grow.
Then, too, the natives are mortally afraid of the numerous whippoorwills which grow vocal on warm nights.
It is vowed that the birds are psychopomps lying in wait for the souls of the dying, and that they time their eery cries in unison with the sufferer's struggling breath.
If they can catch the fleeing soul when it leaves the body, they instantly flutter away chittering in demoniac laughter but if they fail, they subside gradually into a disappointed silence.
These tales, of course, are obsolete and ridiculous because they come down from very old times.
Dunwich is indeed ridiculously old older by far than any of the communities within thirty miles of it.
South of the village one may still spy the cellar walls and chimney of the ancient Bishop house, which was built before 1700 whilst the ruins of the mill at the falls, built in 1806, form the most modern piece of architecture to be seen.
Industry did not flourish here, and the Nineteenth Century factory movement proved short lived.
Oldest of all are the great rings of rough hewn stone columns on the hilltops, but these are more generally attributed to the Indians than to the settlers.
Deposits of skulls and bones, found within these circles and around the sizable table like rock on Sentinel Hill, sustain the popular belief that such spots were once the burial places of the Pocumtucks even though many ethnologists, disregarding the absurd improbability of such a theory, persist in believing the remains Caucasian.
It was in the township of Dunwich, in a large and partly inhabited farmhouse set against a hillside four miles from the village and a mile and a half from any other dwelling, that Wilbur Whateley was born at 5 a. m. on Sunday, the second of February, 1913.
This date was recalled because it was Candlemas, which people in Dunwich curiously observe under another name and because the noises in the hills had sounded, and all the dogs of the countryside had barked persistently, throughout the night before.
Less worthy of notice was the fact that the mother was one of the decadent Whateleys, a somewhat deformed, unattractive albino woman of 35, living with an aged and half insane father about whom the most frightful tales of wizardry had been whispered in his youth.
Lavinia Whateley had no known husband, but according to the custom of the region made no attempt to disavow the child concerning the other side of whose ancestry the country folk might and did speculate as widely as they chose.
On the contrary, she seemed strangely proud of the dark, goatish looking infant who formed such a contrast to her own sickly and pink eyed albinism, and was heard to mutter many curious prophecies about its unusual powers and tremendous future.
Lavinia was one who would be apt to mutter such things, for she was a lone creature given to wandering amidst thunderstorms in the hills and trying to read the great odorous books which her father had inherited through two centuries of Whateleys, and which were fast falling to pieces with age and worm holes.
She had never been to school, but was filled with disjointed scraps of ancient lore that Old Whateley had taught her.
The remote farmhouse had always been feared because of Old Whateley's reputation for black magic, and the unexplained death by violence of Mrs. Whateley when Lavinia was twelve years old had not helped to make the place popular.
Isolated among strange influences, Lavinia was fond of wild and grandiose daydreams and singular occupations nor was her leisure much taken up by household cares in a home from which all standards of order and cleanliness had long since disappeared.
There was a hideous screaming which echoed above even the hill noises and the dogs' barking on the night Wilbur was born, but no known doctor or midwife presided at his coming.
Neighbors knew nothing of him till a week afterward, when Old Whateley drove his sleigh through the snow into Dunwich Village and discoursed incoherently to the group of loungers at Osborn's general store.
There seemed to be a change in the old man an added element of furtiveness in the clouded brain which subtly transformed him from an object to a subject of fear though he was not one to be perturbed by any common family event.
Amidst it all he showed some trace of the pride later noticed in his daughter, and what he said of the child's paternity was remembered by many of his hearers years afterward.
''I dun't keer what folks think ef Lavinny's boy looked like his pa, he wouldn't look like nothin' ye expeck.
Ye needn't think the only folks is the folks hereabouts.
Lavinny's read some, an' has seed some things the most o' ye only tell abaout.
I calc'late her man is as good a husban' as ye kin find this side of Aylesbury an' ef ye knowed as much abaout the hills as I dew, ye wouldn't ast no better church weddin' nor her'n.
Let me tell ye suthin' some day yew folks'll hear a child o' Lavinny's a callin' its father's name on the top o' Sentinel Hill!''
The only persons who saw Wilbur during the first month of his life were old Zechariah Whateley, of the undecayed Whateleys, and Earl Sawyer's common law wife, Mamie Bishop.
Mamie's visit was frankly one of curiosity, and her subsequent tales did justice to her observations but Zechariah came to lead a pair of Alderney cows which Old Whateley had bought of his son Curtis.
This marked the beginning of a course of cattle buying on the part of small Wilbur's family which ended only in 1928, when the Dunwich horror came and went yet at no time did the ramshackle Whateley barn seem over crowded with livestock.
There came a period when people were curious enough to steal up and count the herd that grazed precariously on the steep hillside above the old farmhouse, and they could never find more than ten or twelve anemic, bloodless looking specimens.
Evidently some blight or distemper, perhaps sprung from the unwholesome pasturage or the diseased fungi and timbers of the filthy barn, caused a heavy mortality amongst the Whateley animals.
Odd wounds or sores, having something of the aspect of incisions, seemed to afflict the visible cattle and once or twice during the earlier months certain callers fancied they could discern similar sores about the throats of the gray, unshaven old man and his slatternly, crinkly haired albino daughter.
In the spring after Wilbur's birth Lavinia resumed her customary rambles in the hills, bearing in her misproportioned arms the swarthy child.
Public interest in the Whateleys subsided after most of the country folk had seen the baby, and no one bothered to comment on the swift development which that newcomer seemed every day to exhibit.
Wilbur's growth was indeed phenomenal, for within three months of his birth he had attained a size and muscular power not usually found in infants under a full year of age.
His motions and even his vocal sounds showed a restraint and deliberateness highly peculiar in an infant, and no one was really unprepared when, at seven months, he began to walk unassisted, with falterings which another month was sufficient to remove.
It was somewhat after this time on Hallowe'en that a great blaze was seen at midnight on the top of Sentinel Hill where the old table like stone stands amidst its tumulus of ancient bones.
Considerable talk was started when Silas Bishop of the undecayed Bishops mentioned having seen the boy running sturdily up that hill ahead of his mother about an hour before the blaze was remarked.
Silas was rounding up a stray heifer, but he nearly forgot his mission when he fleetingly spied the two figures in the dim light of his lantern.
They darted almost noiselessly through the underbrush, and the astonished watcher seemed to think they were entirely unclothed.
Afterward he could not be sure about the boy, who may have had some kind of a fringed belt and a pair of dark blue trunks or trousers on.
Wilbur was never subsequently seen alive and conscious without complete and tightly buttoned attire, the disarrangement or threatened disarrangement of which always seemed to fill him with anger and alarm.
His contrast with his squalid mother and grandfather in this respect was thought very notable until the horror of 1928 suggested the most valid of reasons.
The next January gossips were mildly interested in the fact that ''Lavinny's black brat'' had commenced to talk, and at the age of only eleven months.
His speech was somewhat remarkable both because of its difference from the ordinary accents of the region, and because it displayed a freedom from infantile lisping of which many children of three or four might well be proud.
The boy was not talkative, yet when he spoke he seemed to reflect some elusive element wholly unpossessed by Dunwich and its denizens.
The strangeness did not reside in what he said, or even in the simple idioms he used but seemed vaguely linked with his intonation or with the internal organs that produced the spoken sounds.
His facial aspect, too, was remarkable for its maturity for though he shared his mother's and grandfather's chinlessness, his firm and precociously shaped nose united with the expression on his large, dark, almost Latin eyes to give him an air of quasi adulthood and well nigh preternatural intelligence.
He was, however, exceedingly ugly despite his appearance of brilliancy there being something almost goatish or animalistic about his thick lips, large pored, yellowish skin, coarse crinkly hair, and oddly elongated ears.
He was soon disliked even more decidedly than his mother and grandsire, and all conjectures about him were spiced with references to the bygone magic of Old Whateley, and how the hills once shook when he shrieked the dreadful name of Yog Sothoth in the midst of a circle of stones with a great book open in his arms before him.
Dogs abhorred the boy, and he was always obliged to take various defensive measures against their barking menace.
Meanwhile Old Whateley continued to buy cattle without measurably increasing the size of his herd.
He also cut timber and began to repair the unused parts of his house a spacious, peaked roofed affair whose rear end was buried entirely in the rocky hillside, and whose three least ruined ground floor rooms had always been sufficient for himself and his daughter.
There must have been prodigious reserves of strength in the old man to enable him to accomplish so much hard labor and though he still babbled dementedly at times, his carpentry seemed to show the effects of sound calculation.
It had really begun as soon as Wilbur was born, when one of the many tool sheds had been put suddenly in order, clapboarded, and fitted with a stout fresh lock.
Now, in restoring the abandoned upper story of the house, he was a no less thorough craftsman.
His mania showed itself only in his tight boarding up of all the windows in the reclaimed section though many declared that it was a crazy thing to bother with the reclamation at all.
Less inexplicable was his fitting up of another downstairs room for his new grandson a room which several callers saw, though no one was ever admitted to the closely boarded upper story.
This chamber he lined with tall, firm shelving along which he began gradually to arrange, in apparently careful order, all the rotting ancient books and parts of books which during his own day had been heaped promiscuously in odd corners of the various rooms.
''I made some use of 'em,'' he would say as he tried to mend a torn black letter page with paste prepared on the rusty kitchen stove, ''but the boy's fitten to make better use of 'em.
He'd orter hev 'em as well sot as he kin for they're goin' to be all of his larnin'.''
When Wilbur was a year and seven months old in September of 1914 his size and accomplishments were almost alarming.
He had grown as large as a child of four, and was a fluent and incredibly intelligent talker.
He ran freely about the fields and hills, and accompanied his mother on all her wanderings.
At home he would pore diligently over the queer pictures and charts in his grandfather's books, while Old Whateley would instruct and catechize him through long, hushed afternoons.
By this time the restoration of the house was finished, and those who watched it wondered why one of the upper windows had been made into a solid plank door.
It was a window in the rear of the east gable end, close against the hill and no one could imagine why a cleated wooden runway was built up to it from the ground.
About the period of this work's completion people noticed that the old tool house, tightly locked and windowlessly clapboarded since Wilbur's birth, had been abandoned again.
The door swung listlessly open, and when Earl Sawyer once stepped within after a cattle selling call on Old Whateley he was quite discomposed by the singular odor he encountered such a stench, he averred, as he had never before smelt in all his life except near the Indian circles on the hills, and which could not come from anything sane or of this earth.
But then, the homes and sheds of Dunwich folk have never been remarkable for olfactory immaculateness.
The following months were void of visible events, save that everyone swore to a slow but steady increase in the mysterious hill noises.
On May Eve of 1915 there were tremors which even the Aylesbury people felt, whilst the following Hallowe'en produced an underground rumbling queerly synchronized with bursts of flame ''them witch Whateleys' doin's'' from the summit of Sentinel Hill.
Wilbur was growing up uncannily, so that he looked like a boy of ten as he entered his fourth year.
He read avidly by himself now but talked much less than formerly.
A settled taciturnity was absorbing him, and for the first time people began to speak specifically of the dawning look of evil in his goatish face.
He would sometimes mutter an unfamiliar jargon, and chant in bizarre rhythms which chilled the listener with a sense of unexplainable terror.
The aversion displayed toward him by dogs had now become a matter of wide remark, and he was obliged to carry a pistol in order to traverse the countryside in safety.
His occasional use of the weapon did not enhance his popularity amongst the owners of canine guardians.
The few callers at the house would often find Lavinia alone on the ground floor, while odd cries and footsteps resounded in the boarded up second story.
She would never tell what her father and the boy were doing up there, though once she turned pale and displayed an abnormal degree of fear when a jocose fish peddler tried the locked door leading to the stairway.
That peddler told the store loungers at Dunwich Village that he thought he heard a horse stamping on that floor above.
The loungers reflected, thinking of the door and runway, and of the cattle that so swiftly disappeared.
Then they shuddered as they recalled tales of Old Whateley's youth, and of the strange things that are called out of the earth when a bullock is sacrificed at the proper time to certain heathen gods.
It had for some time been noticed that dogs had begun to hate and fear the whole Whateley place as violently as they hated and feared young Wilbur personally.
In 1917 the war came, and Squire Sawyer Whateley, as chairman of the local draft board, had hard work finding a quota of young Dunwich men fit even to be sent to a development camp.
The government, alarmed at such signs of wholesale regional decadence, sent several officers and medical experts to investigate conducting a survey which New England newspaper readers may still recall.
It was the publicity attending this investigation which set reporters on the track of the Whateleys, and caused the Boston Globe and Arkham Advertiser to print flamboyant Sunday stories of young Wilbur's precociousness, Old Whateley's black magic, the shelves of strange books, the sealed second story of the ancient farmhouse, and the weirdness of the whole region and its hill noises.
Wilbur was four and a half then, and looked like a lad of fifteen.
His lip and cheek were fuzzy with a coarse dark down, and his voice had begun to break.
Earl Sawyer went out to the Whateley place with both sets of reporters and camera men, and called their attention to the queer stench which now seemed to trickle down from the sealed upper spaces.
It was, he said, exactly like a smell he had found in the tool shed abandoned when the house was finally repaired, and like the faint odors which he sometimes thought he caught near the stone circles on the mountains.
Dunwich folk read the stories when they appeared, and grinned over the obvious mistakes.
They wondered, too, why the writers made so much of the fact that Old Whateley always paid for his cattle in gold pieces of extremely ancient date.
The Whateleys had received their visitors with ill concealed distaste, though they did not dare court further publicity by a violent resistance or refusal to talk.
For a decade the annals of the Whateleys sink indistinguishably into the general life of a morbid community used to their queer ways and hardened to their May Eve and All Hallow orgies.
Twice a year they would light fires on the top of Sentinel Hill, at which times the mountain rumblings would recur with greater and greater violence while at all seasons there were strange and portentous doings at the lonely farmhouse.
In the course of time callers professed to hear sounds in the sealed upper story even when all the family were downstairs, and they wondered how swiftly or how lingeringly a cow or bullock was usually sacrificed.
There was talk of a complaint to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals but nothing ever came of it, since Dunwich folk are never anxious to call the outside world's attention to themselves.
About 1923, when Wilbur was a boy of ten whose mind, voice, stature, and bearded face gave all the impressions of maturity, a second great siege of carpentry went on at the old house.
It was all inside the sealed upper part, and from bits of discarded lumber people concluded that the youth and his grandfather had knocked out all the partitions and even removed the attic floor, leaving only one vast open void between the ground story and the peaked roof.
They had torn down the great central chimney, too, and fitted the rusty range with a flimsy outside tin stove pipe.
In the spring after this event Old Whateley noticed the growing number of whippoorwills that would come out of Cold Spring Glen to chirp under his window at night.
He seemed to regard the circumstance as one of great significance, and told the loungers at Osborn's that he thought his time had almost come.
''They whistle jest in tune with my breathin' naow,'' he said, ''an' I guess they're gittin' ready to ketch my soul.
They know it's a goin' aout, an' dun't calc'late to miss it.
Yew'll know, boys, arter I'm gone, whether they git me er not.
Ef they dew, they'll keep up a singin' an' laffin' till break o' day.
Ef they dun't, they'll kinder quiet daown like.
I expeck them an' the souls they hunts fer hev some pretty tough tussles sometimes.''
On Lammas Night, 1924, Dr. Houghton of Aylesbury was hastily summoned by Wilbur Whateley, who had lashed his one remaining horse through the darkness and telephoned from Osborn's in the village.
He found Old Whateley in a very grave state, with a cardiac action and stertorous breathing that told of an end not far off.
The shapeless albino daughter and oddly bearded grandson stood by the bedside, whilst from the vacant abyss overhead there came a disquieting suggestion of rhythmical surging or lapping, as of the waves on some level beach.
The doctor, though, was chiefly disturbed by the chattering night birds outside a seemingly limitless legion of whippoorwills that cried their endless message in repetitions timed diabolically to the wheezing gasps of the dying man.
It was uncanny and unnatural too much, thought Dr. Houghton, like the whole of the region he had entered so reluctantly in response to the urgent call.
Toward 1 o'clock Old Whateley gained consciousness, and interrupted his wheezing to choke out a few words to his grandson.
''More space, Willy, more space soon.
Yew grows an' that grows faster.
It'll be ready to sarve ye soon, boy.
Open up the gates to Yog Sothoth with the long chant that ye'll find on page 751 of the complete edition, an' then put a match to the prison.
Fire from airth can't burn it nohaow!''
He was obviously quite mad.
After a pause, during which the flock of whippoorwills outside adjusted their cries to the altered tempo while some indications of the strange hill noises came from afar off, he added another sentence or two.
''Feed it reg'lar, Willy, an' mind the quantity but dun't let it grow too fast fer the place, fer ef it busts quarters or gits aout afore ye opens to Yog Sothoth, it's all over an' no use.
Only them from beyont kin make it multiply an' work.... Only them, the old uns as wants to come back....''  But speech gave place to gasps again, and Lavinia screamed at the way the whippoorwills followed the change.
It was the same for more than an hour, when the final throaty rattle came.
Dr. Houghton drew shrunken lids over the glazing gray eyes as the tumult of birds faded imperceptibly to silence.
Lavinia sobbed, but Wilbur only chuckled whilst the hill noises rumbled faintly.
''They didn't git him,'' he muttered in his heavy bass voice.
Wilbur was by this time a scholar of really tremendous erudition in his one sided way, and was quietly known by correspondence to many librarians in distant places where rare and forbidden books of old days are kept.
He was more and more hated and dreaded around Dunwich because of certain youthful disappearances which suspicion laid vaguely at his door but was always able to silence inquiry through fear or through use of that fund of old time gold which still, as in his grandfather's time, went forth regularly and increasingly for cattle buying.
He was now tremendously mature of aspect, and his height, having reached the normal adult limit, seemed inclined to wax beyond that figure.
In 1925, when a scholarly correspondent from Miskatonic University called upon him one day and departed pale and puzzled, he was fully six and three quarters feet tall.
Through all the years Wilbur had treated his half deformed albino mother with a growing contempt, finally forbidding her to go to the hills with him on May Eve and Hallowmass and in 1926 the poor creature complained to Mamie Bishop of being afraid of him.
''They's more abaout him as I knows than I kin tell ye, Mamie,'' she said, ''an' naowadays they's more nor what I know myself.
I vaow afur Gawd, I dun't know what he wants nor what he's a tryin' to dew.''
That Hallowe'en the hill noises sounded louder than ever, and fire burned on Sentinel Hill as usual, but people paid more attention to the rhythmical screaming of vast flocks of unnaturally belated whippoorwills which seemed to be assembled near the unlighted Whateley farmhouse.
After midnight their shrill notes burst into a kind of pandemoniac cachinnation which filled all the countryside, and not until dawn did they finally quiet down.
Then they vanished, hurrying southward where they were fully a month overdue.
What this meant, no one could quite be certain till later.
None of the countryfolk seemed to have died but poor Lavinia Whateley, the twisted albino, was never seen again.
In the summer of 1927 Wilbur repaired two sheds in the farmyard and began moving his books and effects out to them.
Soon afterward Earl Sawyer told the loungers at Osborn's that more carpentry was going on in the Whateley farmhouse.
Wilbur was closing all the doors and windows on the ground floor, and seemed to be taking out partitions as he and his grandfather had done upstairs four years before.
He was living in one of the sheds, and Sawyer thought he seemed unusually worried and tremulous.
People generally suspected him of knowing something about his mother's disappearance, and very few ever approached his neighborhood now.
His height had increased to more than seven feet, and showed no signs of ceasing its development.
The following winter brought an event no less strange than Wilbur's first trip outside the Dunwich region.
Correspondence with the Widener Library at Harvard, the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris, the British Museum, the University of Buenos Aires, and the Library of Miskatonic University at Arkham had failed to get him the loan of a book he desperately wanted so at length he set out in person, shabby, dirty, bearded, and uncouth of dialect, to consult the copy at Miskatonic, which was the nearest to him geographically.
Almost eight feet tall, and carrying a cheap new valise from Osborn's general store, this dark and goatish gargoyle appeared one day in Arkham in quest of the dreaded volume kept under lock and key at the college library the hideous Necronomicon of the mad Arab Alhazred in Olaus Wormius' Latin version, as printed in Spain in the Seventeenth Century.
He had never seen a city before, but had no thought save to find his way to the university grounds where, indeed, he passed heedlessly by the great white fanged watchdog that barked with unnatural fury and enmity, and tugged frantically at its stout chain.
Wilbur had with him the priceless but imperfect copy of Dr. Dee's English version which his grandfather had bequeathed him, and upon receiving access to the Latin copy he at once began to collate the two texts with the aim of discovering a certain passage which would have come on the 751st page of his own defective volume.
This much he could not civilly refrain from telling the librarian the same erudite Henry Armitage A. M. Miskatonic, Ph.
D. Princeton, Litt.
D. Johns Hopkins who had once called at the farm, and who now politely plied him with questions.
He was looking, he had to admit, for a kind of formula or incantation containing the frightful name Yog Sothoth, and it puzzled him to find discrepancies, duplications, and ambiguities which made the matter of determination far from easy.
As he copied the formula he finally chose, Dr. Armitage looked involuntarily over his shoulder at the open pages the left hand one of which, in the Latin version, contained such monstrous threats to the peace and sanity of the world.
Nor is it to be thought ran the text as Armitage mentally translated it that man is either the oldest or the last of earth's masters, or that the common bulk of life and substance walks alone.
The Old Ones were, the Old Ones are, and the Old Ones shall be.
Not in the spaces we know, but between them.
They walk serene and primal, undimensioned and to us unseen.
Yog Sothoth knows the gate.
Yog Sothoth is the gate.
Yog Sothoth is the key and guardian of the gate.
Past, present, future, all are one in Yog Sothoth.
He knows where the Old Ones broke through of old, and where They shall break through again.
He knows where They have trod earth's fields, and where They still tread them, and why no one can behold Them as They tread.
By Their smell can men sometimes know Them near, but of Their semblance can no man know, saving only in the features of those They have begotten on mankind and of those are there many sorts, differing in likeness from man's truest eidolon to that shape without sight or substance which is They.
They walk unseen and foul in lonely places where the Words have been spoken and the Rites howled through at their Seasons.
The wind gibbers with Their voices, and the earth mutters with Their consciousness.
They bend the forest and crush the city, yet may not forest or city behold the hand that smites.
Kadath in the cold waste hath known Them, and what man knows Kadath?
The ice desert of the South and the sunken isles of Ocean hold stones whereon Their seal is engraven, but who hath seen the deep frozen city or the sealed tower long garlanded with seaweed and barnacles?
Great Cthulhu is Their cousin, yet can he spy Them only dimly.
Ia Shub Niggurath!
As a foulness shall ye know Them.
Their hand is at your throats, yet ye see Them not and Their habitation is even one with your guarded threshold.
Yog Sothoth is the key to the gate, whereby the spheres meet.
Man rules now where They ruled once They shall soon rule where man rules now.
After summer is winter, and after winter summer.
They wait patient and potent, for here shall They reign again.
Dr. Armitage, associating what he was reading with what he had heard of Dunwich and its brooding presences, and of Wilbur Whateley and his dim, hideous aura that stretched from a dubious birth to a cloud of probable matricide, felt a wave of fright as tangible as a draft of the tomb's cold clamminess.
The bent, goatish giant before him seemed like the spawn of another planet or dimension like something only partly of mankind, and linked to black gulfs of essence and entity that stretch like titan fantasms beyond all spheres of force and matter, space and time.
Presently Wilbur raised his head and began speaking in that strange, resonant fashion which hinted at sound producing organs unlike the run of mankind's.
''Mr.
Armitage,'' he said, ''I calc'late I've got to take that book home.
They's things in it I've got to try under sarten conditions that I can't git here, an' it 'ud be a mortal sin to let a red tape rule hold me up.
Let me take it along, sir, an' I'll swar they wun't nobody know the difference.
I dun't need to tell ye I'll take good keer of it.
It wa'n't me that put this Dee copy in the shape it is....''  He stopped as he saw firm denial on the librarian's face, and his own goatish features grew crafty.
Armitage, half ready to tell him he might make a copy of what parts he needed, thought suddenly of the possible consequences and checked himself.
There was too much responsibility in giving such a being the key to such blasphemous outer spheres.
Whateley saw how things stood, and tried to answer lightly.
''Wal, all right, ef ye feel that way abaout it.
Maybe Harvard wun't be so fussy as yew be.''
And without saying more he rose and strode out of the building, stooping at each doorway.
Armitage heard the savage yelping of the great watchdog, and studied Whateley's gorilla like lope as he crossed the bit of campus visible from the window.
He thought of the wild tales he had heard, and recalled the old Sunday stories in the Advertiser these things, and the lore he had picked up from Dunwich rustics and villagers during his one visit there.
Unseen things not of earth or at least not of tri dimensional earth rushed fetid and horrible through New England's glens, and brooded obscenely on the mountain tops.
Of this he had long felt certain.
Now he seemed to sense the close presence of some terrible part of the intruding horror, and to glimpse a hellish advance in the black dominion of the ancient and once passive nightmare.
He locked away the Necronomicon with a shudder of disgust, but the room still reeked with an unholy and unidentifiable stench.
''As a foulness shall ye know them,'' he quoted.
Yes the odor was the same as that which had sickened him at the Whateley farmhouse less than three years before.
He thought of Wilbur, goatish and ominous, once again, and laughed mockingly at the village rumors of his parentage.
''Inbreeding?''
Armitage muttered half aloud to himself.
''Great God, what simpletons!
Show them Arthur Machen's Great God Pan and they'll think it a common Dunwich scandal!
But what thing what cursed shapeless influence on or off this three dimensioned earth was Wilbur Whateley's father?
Born on Candlemas nine months after May Eve of 1912, when the talk about the queer earth noises reached clear to Arkham what walked on the mountains that May Night?
What Roodmas horror fastened itself on the world in half human flesh and blood?''
During the ensuing weeks Dr. Armitage set about to collect all possible data on Wilbur Whateley and the formless presences around Dunwich.
He got in communication with Dr. Houghton of Aylesbury, who had attended Old Whateley in his last illness, and found much to ponder over in the grandfather's last words as quoted by the physician.
A visit to Dunwich Village failed to bring out much that was new but a close survey of the Necronomicon, in those parts which Wilbur had sought so avidly, seemed to supply new and terrible clues to the nature, methods, and desires of the strange evil so vaguely threatening this planet.
Talks with several students of archaic lore in Boston, and letters to many others elsewhere, gave him a growing amazement which passed slowly through varied degrees of alarm to a state of really acute spiritual fear.
As the summer drew on he felt dimly that something ought to be done about the lurking terrors of the upper Miskatonic valley, and about the monstrous being known to the human world as Wilbur Whateley.
The Dunwich horror itself came between Lammas and the equinox in 1928, and Dr. Armitage was among those who witnessed its monstrous prologue.
He had heard, meanwhile, of Whateley's grotesque trip to Cambridge, and of his frantic efforts to borrow or copy from the Necronomicon at the Widener Library.
Those efforts had been in vain, since Armitage had issued warnings of the keenest intensity to all librarians having charge of the dreaded volume.
Wilbur had been shockingly nervous at Cambridge anxious for the book, yet almost equally anxious to get home again, as if he feared the results of being away long.
Early in August the half expected outcome developed, and in the small hours of the third Dr. Armitage was awakened suddenly by the wild, fierce cries of the savage watchdog on the college campus.
Deep and terrible, the snarling, half mad growls and barks continued always in mounting volume, but with hideously significant pauses.
Then there rang out a scream from a wholly different throat such a scream as roused half the sleepers of Arkham and haunted their dreams ever afterward such a scream as could come from no being born of earth, or wholly of earth.
Armitage hastened into some clothing and rushed across the street and lawn to the college buildings, saw that others were ahead of him and heard the echoes of a burglar alarm still shrilling from the library.
An open window showed black and gaping in the moonlight.
What had come had indeed completed its entrance for the barking and the screaming, now fast fading into a mixed low growling and moaning, proceeded unmistakably from within.
Some instinct warned Armitage that what was taking place was not a thing for unfortified eyes to see, so he brushed back the crowd with authority as he unlocked the vestibule door.
Among the others he saw Professor Warren Rice and Dr. Francis Morgan, men to whom he had told some of his conjectures and misgivings and these two he motioned to accompany him inside.
The inward sounds, except for a watchful, droning whine from the dog, had by this time quite subsided but Armitage now perceived with a sudden start that a loud chorus of whippoorwills among the shrubbery had commenced a damnably rhythmical piping, as if in unison with the last breath of a dying man.
The building was full of a frightful stench which Dr. Armitage knew too well, and the three men rushed across the hall to the small genealogical reading room whence the low whining came.
For a second nobody dared to turn on the light then Armitage summoned up his courage and snapped the switch.
One of the three it is not certain which shrieked aloud at what sprawled before them among disordered tables and overturned chairs.
Professor Rice declares that he wholly lost consciousness for an instant, though he did not stumble or fall.
The thing that lay half bent on its side in a fetid pool of greenish yellow ichor and tarry stickiness was almost nine feet tall, and the dog had torn off all the clothing and some of the skin.
It was not quite dead, but twitched silently and spasmodically while its chest heaved in monstrous unison with the mad piping of the expectant whippoorwills outside.
Bits of shoe leather and fragments of apparel were scattered about the room, and just inside the window an empty canvas sack lay where it had evidently been thrown.
Near the central desk a revolver had fallen, a dented but undischarged cartridge later explaining why it had not been fired.
The thing itself, however, crowded out all other images at the time.
It would be trite and not wholly accurate to say that no human pen could describe it, but one may properly say that it could not be vividly visualized by anyone whose ideas of aspect and contour are too closely bound up with the common life forms of this planet and of the three known dimensions.
It was partly human, beyond a doubt, with very manlike hands and head, and the goatish, chinless face had the stamp of the Whateleys upon it.
But the torso and lower parts of the body were teratologically fabulous, so that only generous clothing could ever have enabled it to walk on earth unchallenged or uneradicated.
Above the waist it was semi anthropomorphic though its chest, where the dog's rending paws still rested watchfully, had the leathery, reticulated hide of a crocodile or alligator.
The back was piebald with yellow and black, and dimly suggested the squamous covering of certain snakes.
Below the waist, though, it was the worst for here all human resemblance left off and sheer fantasy began.
The skin was thickly covered with coarse black fur, and from the abdomen a score of long greenish gray tentacles with red sucking mouths protruded limply.
Their arrangement was odd, and seemed to follow the symmetries of some cosmic geometry unknown to earth or the solar system.
On each of the hips, deep set in a kind of pinkish, ciliated orbit, was what seemed to be a rudimentary eye whilst in lieu of a tail there depended a kind of trunk or feeler with purple annular markings, and with many evidences of being an undeveloped mouth or throat.
The limbs, save for their black fur, roughly resembled the hind legs of prehistoric earth's giant saurians and terminated in ridgy veined pads that were neither hooves nor claws.
When the thing breathed, its tail and tentacles rhythmically changed color, as if from some circulatory cause normal to the non human side of its ancestry.
In the tentacles this was observable as a deepening of the greenish tinge, whilst in the tail it was manifest as a yellowish appearance which alternated with a sickly grayish white in the spaces between the purple rings.
Of genuine blood there was none only the fetid greenish yellow ichor which trickled along the painted floor beyond the radius of the stickiness, and left a curious discoloration behind it.
As the presence of the three men seemed to rouse the dying thing, it began to mumble without turning or raising its head.
Dr. Armitage made no written record of its mouthings, but asserts confidently that nothing in English was uttered.
At first the syllables defied all correlation with any speech of earth, but toward the last there came some disjointed fragments evidently taken from the Necronomicon, that monstrous blasphemy in quest of which the thing had perished.
Those fragments, as Armitage recalls them, ran something like ''N'gai, n'gha'ghaa, bugg shoggog, y'hah Yog Sothoth, Yog Sothoth....'' They trailed off into nothingness as the whippoorwills shrieked in rhythmical crescendoes of unholy anticipation.
Then came a halt in the gasping, and the dog raised his head in a long, lugubrious howl.
A change came over the yellow, goatish face of the prostrate thing, and the great black eyes fell in appallingly.
Outside the window the shrilling of the whippoorwills had suddenly ceased, and above the murmurs of the gathering crowd there came the sound of a panic struck whirring and fluttering.
Against the moon vast clouds of feathery watchers rose and raced from sight, frantic at that which they had sought for prey.
All at once the dog started up abruptly, gave a frightened bark, and leaped nervously out the window by which it had entered.
A cry rose from the crowd, and Dr. Armitage shouted to the men outside that no one must be admitted till the police or medical examiner came.
He was thankful that the windows were just too high to permit of peering in, and drew the dark curtains carefully down over each one.
By this time two policemen had arrived and Dr. Morgan, meeting them in the vestibule, was urging them for their own sakes to postpone entrance to the stench filled reading room till the examiner came and the prostrate thing could be covered up.
Meanwhile frightful changes were taking place on the floor.
One need not describe the kind and rate of shrinkage and disintegration that occurred before the eyes of Dr. Armitage and Professor Rice but it is permissible to say that, aside from the external appearance of face and hands, the really human elements in Wilbur Whateley must have been very small.
When the medical examiner came, there was only a sticky whitish mass on the painted boards, and the monstrous odor had nearly disappeared.
Apparently Whateley had had no skull or bony skeleton at least, in any true or stable sense.
He had taken somewhat after his unknown father.
Yet all this was only the prologue of the actual Dunwich horror.
Formalities were gone through by bewildered officials, abnormal details were duly kept from press and public, and men were sent to Dunwich and Aylesbury to look up property and notify any who might be heirs of the late Wilbur Whateley.
They found the countryside in great agitation, both because of the growing rumblings beneath the domed hills, and because of the unwonted stench and the surging, lapping sounds which came increasingly from the great empty shell formed by Whateley's boarded up farmhouse.
Earl Sawyer, who tended the horse and cattle during Wilbur's absence, had developed a wofully acute case of nerves.
The officials devised excuses not to enter the noisome boarded place and were glad to confine their survey of the deceased's living quarters, the newly mended sheds, to a single visit.
They filed a ponderous report at the court house in Aylesbury, and litigations concerning heirship are said to be still in progress amongst the innumerable Whateleys, decayed and undecayed, of the upper Miskatonic valley.
An almost interminable manuscript in strange characters, written in a huge ledger and adjudged a sort of diary because of the spacing and the variations in ink and penmanship, presented a baffling puzzle to those who found it on the old bureau which served as its owner's desk.
After a week of debate it was sent to Miskatonic University, together with the deceased's collection of strange books, for study and possible translation but even the best linguists soon saw that it was not likely to be unriddled with ease.
No trace of the ancient gold with which Wilbur and Old Whateley always paid their debts has yet been discovered.
It was in the dark of September ninth that the horror broke loose.
The hill noises had been very pronounced during the evening, and dogs barked frantically all night.
Early risers on the tenth noticed a peculiar stench in the air.
About 7 o'clock Luther Brown, the hired boy at George Corey's, between Cold Spring Glen and the village, rushed frenziedly back from his morning trip to Ten Acre Meadow with the cows.
He was almost convulsed with fright as he stumbled into the kitchen and in the yard outside the no less frightened herd were pawing and lowing pitifully, having followed the boy back in the panic they shared with him.
Between gasps Luther tried to stammer out his tale to Mrs. Corey.
''Up thar in the rud beyont the glen, Mis' Corey they's suthin' ben thar!
It smells like thunder, an' all the bushes an' little trees is pushed back from the rud like they'd a haouse ben moved along of it.
An' that ain't the wust, nuther.
They's prints in the rud, Mis' Corey great raound prints as big as barrel heads, all sunk daown deep like a elephant had ben along, only they's a sight more nor four feet could make.
I looked at one or two afore I run, an' I see every one was covered with lines spreadin' aout from one place, like as if big palm leaf fans twict or three times as big as any they is hed of ben paounded daown into the rud.
An' the smell was awful, like what it is araound Wizard Whateley's ol' haouse....''  Here he faltered, and seemed to shiver afresh with the fright that had sent him flying home.
Mrs. Corey, unable to extract more information, began telephoning the neighbors thus starting on its rounds the overture of panic that heralded the major terrors.
When she got Sally Sawyer, housekeeper at Seth Bishop's, the nearest place to Whateley's, it became her turn to listen instead of transmit for Sally's boy Chauncey, who slept poorly, had been up on the hill toward Whateley's, and had dashed back in terror after one look at the place, and at the pasturage where Mr. Bishop's cows had been left out all night.
''Yes, Mis' Corey,'' came Sally's tremulous voice over the party wire, ''Cha'ncey he just come back a post in', and couldn't haff talk fer bein' scairt!
He says Ol' Whateley's haouse is all blowed up, with the timbers scattered raound like they'd ben dynamite inside only the bottom floor ain't through, but is all covered with a kind o' tarlike stuff that smells awful an' drips daown offen the aidges onto the graoun' whar the side timbers is blowed away.
An' they's awful kinder marks in the yard, tew great raound marks bigger raound than a hogshead, an' all sticky with stuff like is on the blowed up haouse.
Cha'ncey he says they leads off into the medders, whar a great swath wider'n a barn is matted daown, an' all the stun walls tumbled every which way wherever it goes.
''An' he says, says he, Mis' Corey, as haow he sot to look fer Seth's caows, frighted ez he was an' faound 'em in the upper pasture nigh the Devil's Hop Yard in an awful shape.
Haff on 'em's clean gone, an' nigh haff o' them that's left is sucked most dry o' blood, with sores on 'em like they's ben on Whateley's cattle ever senct Lavinny's black brat was born.
Seth he's gone aout naow to look at 'em, though I'll vaow he wun't keer ter git very nigh Wizard Whateley's!
Cha'ncey didn't look keerful ter see whar the big matted daown swath led arter it leff the pasturage, but he says he thinks it p'inted towards the glen rud to the village.
''I tell ye, Mis' Corey, they's suthin' abroad as hadn't orter be abroad, an' I fer one think that black Wilbur Whateley, as come to the bad eend he desarved, is at the bottom of the breedin' of it.
He wa'n't all human hisself, I allus says to everybody an' I think he an' Ol' Whateley must a raised suthin' in that there nailed up haouse as ain't even so human as he was.
They's allus ben unseen things araound Dunwich livin' things as ain't human an' ain't good fer human folks.
''The graoun' was a'talkin' lass night, an' towards mornin' Cha'ncey he heerd the whippoorwills so laoud in Col' Spring Glen he couldn't sleep none.
Then he thought he heerd another faintlike saound over towards Wizard Whateley's a kinder rippin' or tearin' o' wood, like some big box or crate was bein' opened fur off.
What with this an' that, he didn't git to sleep at all till sunup, an' no sooner was he up this mornin', but he's got to go over to Whateley's an' see what's the matter.
He see enough, I tell ye, Mis' Corey!
This dun't mean no good, an' I think as all the men folks ought to git up a party an' do suthin'.
I know suthin' awful's abaout, an' feel my time is nigh, though only Gawd knows jest what it is.
''Did your Luther take accaount o' whar them big tracks led tew?
No?
Wal, Mis' Corey, ef they was on the glen rud this side o' the glen, an' ain't got to your haouse yet, I calc'late they must go into the glen itself.
They would do that.
I allus says Col' Spring Glen ain't no healthy nor decent place.
The whippoorwills an' fireflies there never did act like they was creaters o' Gawd, an' they's them as says ye kin hear strange things a rushin' an' a talkin' in the air daown thar ef ye stand in the right place, atween the rock falls an' Bear's Den.''
By that noon fully three quarters of the men and boys of Dunwich were trooping over the roads and meadows between the new made Whateley ruins and Cold Spring Glen examining in horror the vast, monstrous prints, the maimed Bishop cattle, the strange, noisome wreck of the farmhouse, and the bruised, matted vegetation of the fields and road sides.
Whatever had burst loose upon the world had assuredly gone down into the great sinister ravine for all the trees on the banks were bent and broken, and a great avenue had been gouged in the precipice hanging underbrush.
It was as though a house, launched by an avalanche, had slid down through the tangled growths of the almost vertical slope.
From below no sound came, but only a distant, undefinable fetor and it is not to be wondered at that the men preferred to stay on the edge and argue, rather than descend and beard the unknown Cyclopean horror in its lair.
Three dogs that were with the party had barked furiously at first, but seemed cowed and reluctant when near the glen.
Someone telephoned the news to the Aylesbury Transcript but the editor, accustomed to wild tales from Dunwich, did no more than concoct a humorous paragraph about it an item soon afterward reproduced by the Associated Press.
That night everyone went home, and every house and barn was barricaded as stoutly as possible.
Needless to say, no cattle were allowed to remain in open pasturage.
About 2 in the morning a frightful stench and the savage barking of the dogs awakened the household at Elmer Frye's, on the eastern edge of Cold Spring Glen, and all agreed that they could hear a sort of muffled swishing or lapping sound from somewhere outside.
Mrs. Frye proposed telephoning the neighbors, and Elmer was about to agree when the noise of splintering wood burst in upon their deliberations.
It came, apparently, from the barn and was quickly followed by a hideous screaming and stamping amongst the cattle.
The dogs slavered and crouched close to the feet of the fear numbed family.
Frye lit a lantern through force of habit, but knew it would be death to go out into that black farmyard.
The children and the women folk whimpered, kept from screaming by some obscure, vestigial instinct of defense which told them their lives depended on silence.
At last the noise of the cattle subsided to a pitiful moaning, and a great snapping, crashing, and crackling ensued.
The Fryes, huddled together in the sitting room, did not dare to move until the last echoes died away far down in Cold Spring Glen.
Then, amidst the dismal moans from the stable and the demoniac piping of late whippoorwills in the glen, Selina Frye tottered to the telephone and spread what news she could of the second phase of the horror.
The next day all the countryside was in a panic and cowed, uncommunicative groups came and went where the fiendish thing had occurred.
Two titan swaths of destruction stretched from the glen to the Frye farmyard, monstrous prints covered the bare patches of ground, and one side of the old red barn had completely caved in.
Of the cattle, only about a quarter could be found and identified.
Some of these were in curious fragments, and all that survived had to be shot.
Earl Sawyer suggested that help be asked from Aylesbury or Arkham, but others maintained it would be of no use.
Old Zebulon Whateley, of a branch that hovered about half way between soundness and decadence, made darkly wild suggestions about rites that ought to be practised on the hilltops.
He came of a line where tradition ran strong, and his memories of chantings in the great stone circles were not altogether connected with Wilbur and his grandfather.
Darkness fell upon a stricken countryside too passive to organize for real defense.
In a few cases closely related families would band together and watch in the gloom under one roof but, in general there was only a repetition of the barricading of the night before, and a futile, ineffective gesture of loading muskets and setting pitchforks handily about.
Nothing, however, occurred except some hill noises and when the day came there were many who hoped that the new horror had gone as swiftly as it had come.
There were even bold souls who proposed an offensive expedition down in the glen, though they did not venture to set an actual example to the still reluctant majority.
When night came again the barricading was repeated, though there was less huddling together of families.
In the morning both the Frye and the Seth Bishop households reported excitement among the dogs and vague sounds and stenches from afar, while early explorers noted with horror a fresh set of the monstrous tracks in the road skirting Sentinel Hill.
As before, the sides of the road showed a bruising indicative of the blasphemously stupendous bulk of the horror whilst the conformation of the tracks seemed to argue a passage in two directions, as if the moving mountain had come from Cold Spring Glen and returned to it along the same path.
At the base of the hill a thirty foot swath of crushed shrubbery and saplings led steeply upward, and the seekers gasped when they saw that even the most perpendicular places did not deflect the inexorable trail.
Whatever the horror was, it could scale a sheer stony cliff of almost complete verticality and as the investigators climbed around to the hill's summit by safer routes they saw that the trail ended or rather, reversed there.
It was here that the Whateleys used to build their hellish fires and chant their hellish rituals by the table like stone on May Eve and Hallowmass.
Now that very stone formed the center of a vast space thrashed around by the mountainous horror, whilst upon its slightly concave surface was a thick fetid deposit of the same tarry stickiness observed on the floor of the ruined Whateley farmhouse when the horror escaped.
Men looked at one another and muttered.
Then they looked down the hill.
Apparently the horror had descended by a route much the same as that of its ascent.
To speculate was futile.
Reason, logic, and normal ideas of motivation stood confounded.
Only old Zebulon, who was not with the group, could have done justice to the situation or suggested a plausible explanation.
Thursday night began much like the others, but it ended less happily.
The whippoorwills in the glen had screamed with such unusual persistence that many could not sleep, and about 3 a. m. all the party telephones rang tremulously.
Those who took down their receivers heard a fright mad voice shriek out, ''Help, oh, my Gawd!...''
and some thought a crashing sound followed the breaking off of the exclamation.
There was nothing more.
No one dared do anything, and no one knew till morning whence the call came.
Then those who had heard it called everyone on the line, and found that only the Fryes did not reply.
The truth appeared an hour later, when a hastily assembled group of armed men trudged out to the Frye place at the head of the glen.
It was horrible, yet hardly a surprize.
There were more swaths and monstrous prints, but there was no longer any house.
It had caved in like an egg shell, and amongst the ruins nothing living or dead could be discovered only a stench and a tarry stickiness.
The Elmer Fryes had been erased from Dunwich.
In the meantime a quieter yet even more spiritually poignant phase of the horror had been blackly unwinding itself behind the closed door of a shelf lined room in Arkham.
The curious manuscript record or diary of Wilbur Whateley, delivered to Miskatonic University for translation, had caused much worry and bafflement among the experts in languages both ancient and modern its very alphabet, notwithstanding a general resemblance to the heavily shaded Arabic used in Mesopotamia, being absolutely unknown to any available authority.
The final conclusion of the linguists was that the text represented an artificial alphabet, giving the effect of a cipher though none of the usual methods of cryptographic solution seemed to furnish any clue, even when applied on the basis of every tongue the writer might conceivably have used.
The ancient books taken from Whateley's quarters, while absorbingly interesting and in several cases promising to open up new and terrible lines of research among philosophers and men of science, were of no assistance whatever in this matter.
One of them, a heavy tome with an iron clasp, was in another unknown alphabet this one of a very different cast, and resembling Sanskrit more than anything else.
The old ledger was at length given wholly into the charge of Dr. Armitage, both because of his peculiar interest in the Whateley matter, and because of his wide linguistic learning and skill in the mystical formulae of antiquity and the Middle Ages.
Armitage had an idea that the alphabet might be something esoterically used by certain forbidden cults which have come down from old times, and which have inherited many forms and traditions from the wizards of the Saracenic world.
That question, however, he did not deem vital since it would be unnecessary to know the origin of the symbols if, as he suspected, they were used as a cipher in a modern language.
It was his belief that, considering the great amount of text involved, the writer would scarcely have wished the trouble of using another speech than his own, save perhaps in certain special formulae and incantations.
Accordingly he attacked the manuscript with the preliminary assumption that the bulk of it was in English.
Dr. Armitage knew, from the repeated failures of his colleagues, that the riddle was a deep and complex one, and that no simple mode of solution could merit even a trial.
All through late August he fortified himself with the massed lore of cryptography, drawing upon the fullest resources of his own library, and wading night after night amidst the arcana of Trithemius' Poligraphia, Giambattista Porta's De Furtivis Literarum Notis, De Vigenere's Traite des Chiffres, Falconer's Cryptomenysis Patefacta, Davys' and Thicknesse's Eighteenth Century treatises, and such fairly modern authorities as Blair, von Marten, and Kluber's Kryptographik.
He interspersed his study of the books with attacks on the manuscript itself, and in time became convinced that he had to deal with one of those subtlest and most ingenious of cryptograms, in which many separate lists of corresponding letters are arranged like the multiplication table, and the message built up with arbitrary key words known only to the initiated.
The older authorities seemed rather more helpful than the newer ones, and Armitage concluded that the code of the manuscript was one of great antiquity, no doubt handed down through a long line of mystical experimenters.
Several times he seemed near daylight, only to be set back by some unforeseen obstacle.
Then, as September approached, the clouds began to clear.
Certain letters, as used in certain parts of the manuscript, emerged definitely and unmistakably and it became obvious that the text was indeed in English.
On the evening of September second the last major barrier gave way, and Dr. Armitage read for the first time a continuous passage of Wilbur Whateley's annals.
It was in truth a diary, as all had thought and it was couched in a style clearly showing the mixed occult erudition and general illiteracy of the strange being who wrote it.
Almost the first long passage that Armitage deciphered, an entry dated November 26, 1916, proved highly startling and disquieting.
It was written, he remembered, by a child of three and a half who looked like a lad of twelve or thirteen.
Today learned the Aklo for the Sabaoth, it ran which did not like, it being answerable from the hill and not from the air.
That upstairs more ahead of me than I had thought it would be, and is not like to have much earth brain.
Shot Elam Hutchins's collie Jack when he went to bite me, and Elam says he would kill me if he dast.
I guess he won't.
Grandfather kept me saying the Dho formula last night, and I think I saw the inner city at the 2 magnetic poles.
I shall go to those poles when the earth is cleared off, if I can't break through with the Dho Hna formula when I commit it.
They from the air told me at Sabbat that it will be years before I can clear off the earth, and I guess Grandfather will be dead then, so I shall have to learn all the angles of the planes and all the formulas between the Yr and the Nhhngr.
They from outside will help, but they can not take body without human blood.
That upstairs looks it will have the right cast.
I can see it a little when I make the Yoorish sign or blow the power of Ibn Ghazi at it, and it is near like them at May Eve on the Hill.
The other face may wear off some.
I wonder how I shall look when the earth is cleared and there are no earth beings on it.
He that came with the Aklo Sabaoth said I may be transfigured, there being much of outside to work on.
Morning found Dr. Armitage in a cold sweat of terror and a frenzy of wakeful concentration.
He had not left the manuscript all night, but sat at his table under the electric light turning page after page with shaking hands as fast as he could decipher the cryptic text.
He had nervously telephoned his wife he would not be home, and when she brought him a breakfast from the house he could scarcely dispose of a mouthful.
All that day he read on, now and then halted maddeningly as a reapplication of the complex key became necessary.
Lunch and dinner were brought him, but he ate only the smallest fraction of either.
Toward the middle of the next night he drowsed off in his chair, but soon woke out of a tangle of nightmares almost as hideous as the truths and menaces to man's existence that he had uncovered.
On the morning of September fourth Professor Rice and Dr. Morgan insisted on seeing him for a while, and departed trembling and ashen gray.
That evening he went to bed, but slept only fitfully.
Wednesday the next day he was back at the manuscript, and began to take copious notes both from the current sections and from those he had already deciphered.
In the small hours of that night he slept a little in an easy chair in his office, but was at the manuscript again before dawn.
Some time before noon his physician, Dr. Hartwell, called to see him and insisted that he cease work.
He refused, intimating that it was of the most vital importance for him to complete the reading of the diary, and promising an explanation in due course of time.
That evening, just as twilight fell, he finished his terrible perusal and sank back exhausted.
His wife, bringing his dinner, found him in a half comatose state but he was conscious enough to warn her off with a sharp cry when he saw her eyes wander toward the notes he had taken.
Weakly rising, he gathered up the scribbled papers and sealed them all in a great envelope, which he immediately placed in his inside coat pocket.
He had sufficient strength to get home, but was so clearly in need of medical aid that Dr. Hartwell was summoned at once.
As the doctor put him to bed he could only mutter over and over again, ''But what, in God's name, can we do?''
Dr. Armitage slept, but was partly delirious the next day.
He made no explanations to Hartwell, but in his calmer moments spoke of the imperative need of a long conference with Rice and Morgan.
His wilder wanderings were very startling indeed, including frantic appeals that something in a boarded up farmhouse be destroyed, and fantastic references to some plan for the extirpation of the entire human race and all animal and vegetable life from the earth by some terrible elder race of beings from another dimension.
He would shout that the world was in danger, since the Elder Things wished to strip it and drag it away from the solar system and cosmos of matter into some other plane or phase of entity from which it had once fallen, vigintillions of eons ago.
At other times he would call for the dreaded Necronomicon and the Daemonolatreia of Remigius, in which he seemed hopeful of finding some formula to check the peril he conjured up.
''Stop them, stop them!''
he would shout.
''Those Whateleys meant to let them in, and the worst of all is left!
Tell Rice and Morgan we must do something it's a blind business, but I know how to make the powder....
It hasn't been fed since the second of August, when Wilbur came here to his death, and at that rate....''  But Armitage had a sound physique despite his seventy three years, and slept off his disorder that night without developing any real fever.
He woke late Friday, clear of head, though sober, with a gnawing fear and tremendous sense of responsibility.
Saturday afternoon he felt able to go over to the library and summon Rice and Morgan for a conference, and the rest of that day and evening the three men tortured their brains in the wildest speculation and the most desperate debate.
Strange and terrible books were drawn voluminously from the stack shelves and from secure places of storage, and diagrams and formulae were copied with feverish haste and in bewildering abundance.
Of skepticism there was none.
All three had seen the body of Wilbur Whateley as it lay on the floor in a room of that very building, and after that not one of them could feel even slightly inclined to treat the diary as a madman's raving.
Opinions were divided as to notifying the Massachusetts State Police, and the negative finally won.
There were things involved which simply could not be believed by those who had not seen a sample, as indeed was made clear during certain subsequent investigations.
Late at night the conference disbanded without having developed a definite plan, but all day Sunday Armitage was busy comparing formulae and mixing chemicals obtained from the college laboratory.
The more he reflected on the hellish diary, the more he was inclined to doubt the efficacy of any material agent in stamping out the entity which Wilbur Whateley had left behind him the earth threatening entity which, unknown to him, was to burst forth in a few hours and become the memorable Dunwich horror.
Monday was a repetition of Sunday with Dr. Armitage, for the task in hand required an infinity of research and experiment.
Further consultations of the monstrous diary brought about various changes of plan, and he knew that even in the end a large amount of uncertainty must remain.
By Tuesday he had a definite line of action mapped out, and believed he would try a trip to Dunwich within a week.
Then, on Wednesday, the great shock came.
Tucked obscurely away in a corner of the Arkham Advertiser was a facetious little item from the Associated Press, telling what a record breaking monster the bootleg whisky of Dunwich had raised up.
Armitage, half stunned, could only telephone for Rice and Morgan.
Far into the night they discussed, and the next day was a whirlwind of preparation on the part of them all.
Armitage knew he would be meddling with terrible powers, yet saw that there was no other way to annul the deeper and more malign meddling which others had done before him.
Friday morning Armitage, Rice and Morgan set out by motor for Dunwich, arriving at the village about 1 in the afternoon.
The day was pleasant, but even in the brightest sunlight a kind of quiet dread and portent seemed to hover about the strangely domed hills and the deep, shadowy ravines of the stricken region.
Now and then on some mountain top a gaunt circle of stones could be glimpsed against the sky.
From the air of hushed fright at Osborn's store they knew something hideous had happened, and soon learned of the annihilation of the Elmer Frye house and family.
Throughout that afternoon they rode around Dunwich, questioning the natives concerning all that had occurred, and seeing for themselves with rising pangs of horror the drear Frye ruins with their lingering traces of the tarry stickiness, the blasphemous tracks in the Frye yard, the wounded Seth Bishop cattle, and the enormous swaths of disturbed vegetation in various places.
The trail up and down Sentinel Hill seemed to Armitage of almost cataclysmic significance, and he looked long at the sinister altarlike stone on the summit.
At length the visitors, apprised of a party of State Police which had come from Aylesbury that morning in response to the first telephone reports of the Frye tragedy, decided to seek out the officers and compare notes as far as practicable.
This, however, they found more easily planned than performed since no sign of the party could be found in any direction.
There had been five of them in a car, but now the car stood empty near the ruins in the Frye yard.
The natives, all of whom had talked with the policemen, seemed at first as perplexed as Armitage and his companions.
Then old Sam Hutchins thought of something and turned pale, nudging Fred Farr and pointing to the dank, deep hollow that yawned close by.
''Gawd,'' he gasped, ''I telled 'em not ter go daown into the glen, an' I never thought nobody'd dew it with them tracks an' that smell an' the whippoorwills a screechin' daown thar in the dark o' noonday....''  A cold shudder ran through natives and visitors alike, and every ear seemed strained in a kind of instinctive, unconscious listening.
Armitage, now that he had actually come upon the horror and its monstrous work, trembled with the responsibility he felt to be his.
Night would soon fall, and it was then that the mountainous blasphemy lumbered upon its eldritch course.
Negotium perambulans in tenebris....
The old librarian rehearsed the formulae he had memorized, and clutched the paper containing the alternative ones he had not memorized.
He saw that his electric flashlight was in working order.
Rice, beside him, took from a valise a metal sprayer of the sort used in combating insects whilst Morgan uncased the big game rifle on which he relied despite his colleague's warnings that no material weapon would be of help.
Armitage, having read the hideous diary, knew painfully well what kind of a manifestation to expect, but he did not add to the fright of the Dunwich people by giving any hints or clues.
He hoped that it might be conquered without any revelation to the world of the monstrous thing it had escaped.
As the shadows gathered, the natives commenced to disperse homeward, anxious to bar themselves indoors despite the present evidence that all human locks and bolts were useless before a force that could bend trees and crush houses when it chose.
They shook their heads at the visitors' plan to stand guard at the Frye ruins near the glen and as they left, had little expectancy of ever seeing the watchers again.
There were rumblings under the hills that night, and the whippoorwills piped threateningly.
Once in a while a wind, sweeping up out of Cold Spring Glen, would bring a touch of ineffable fetor to the heavy night air such a fetor as all three of the watchers had smelled once before, when they stood above a dying thing that had passed for fifteen years and a half as a human being.
But the looked for terror did not appear.
Whatever was down there in the glen was biding its time, and Armitage told his colleagues it would be suicidal to try to attack it in the dark.
Morning came wanly, and the night sounds ceased.
It was a gray, bleak day, with now and then a drizzle of rain and heavier and heavier clouds seemed to be piling themselves up beyond the hills to the northwest.
The men from Arkham were undecided what to do.
Seeking shelter from the increasing rainfall beneath one of the few undestroyed Frye outbuildings, they debated the wisdom of waiting, or of taking the aggressive and going down into the glen in quest of their nameless, monstrous quarry.
The downpour waxed in heaviness, and distant peals of thunder sounded from far horizons.
Sheet lightning shimmered, and then a forky bolt flashed near at hand, as if descending into the accursed glen itself.
The sky grew very dark, and the watchers hoped that the storm would prove a short, sharp one followed by clear weather.
It was still gruesomely dark when, not much over an hour later, a confused babel of voices sounded down the road.
Another moment brought to view a frightened group of more than a dozen men, running, shouting, and even whimpering hysterically.
Someone in the lead began sobbing out words, and the Arkham men started violently when those words developed a coherent form.
''Oh, my Gawd, my Gawd!''
the voice choked out ''it's a goin' agin, an' this time by day!
It's aout it's aout an' a movin' this very minute, an' only the Lord knows when it'll be on us all!''
The speaker panted into silence, but another took up his message.
''Nigh on a haour ago Zeb Whateley here heerd the 'phone a ringin', an' it was Mis' Corey, George's wife that lives daown by the junction.
She says the hired boy Luther was aout drivin' in the caows from the storm arter the big bolt, when he see all the trees a bendin' at the maouth o' the glen opposite side ter this an' smelt the same awful smell like he smelt when he faound the big tracks las' Monday mornin'.
An' she says he says they was a swishin', lappin' saound, more nor what the bendin' trees an' bushes could make, an' all on a suddent the trees along the rud begun ter git pushed one side, an' they was a awful stompin' an' splashin' in the mud.
But mind ye, Luther he didn't see nothin' at all, only jest the bendin' trees an' underbrush.
''Then fur ahead where Bishop's Brook goes under the rud he heerd a awful creakin' an' strainin' on the bridge, an' says he could tell the saound o' wood a startin' to crack an' split.
An' all the whiles he never see a thing, only them trees an' bushes a bendin'.
An' when the swishin' saound got very fur off on the rud towards Wizard Whateley's an' Sentinel Hill Luther he had the guts ter step up whar he'd heerd it fust an' look at the graound.
It was all mud an' water, an' the sky was dark, an' the rain was wipin' aout all tracks abaout as fast as could be but beginnin' at the glen maouth, whar the trees bed moved, they was still some o' them awful prints big as bar'ls like he seen Monday.''
At this point the first excited speaker interrupted.
''But that ain't the trouble naow that was only the start.
Zeb here was callin' folks up an' everybody was a listenin' in when a call from Seth Bishop's cut in.
His haousekeeper Sally was carryin' on fit ter kill she'd jest seed the trees a bendin' beside the rud, an' says they was a kind o' mushy saound, like a elephant puffin' an' treadin', a headin' fer the haouse.
Then she up an' spoke suddent of a fearful smell, an' says her boy Cha'ncey was a screamin' as haow it was jest like what he smelt up to the Whateley rewins Monday mornin'.
An' the dogs was all barkin' an' whinin' awful.
''An' then she let aout a turrible yell, an' says the shed daown the rud hed jest caved in like the storm hed blowed it over, only the wind wa'n't strong enough to dew that.
Everybody was a listenin', an' ye could hear lots o' folks on the wire a gaspin'.
All to onct Sally she yelled agin, an' says the front yard picket fence bed jest crumpled up, though they wa'n't no sign o' what done it.
Then everybody on the line could hear Cha'ncey an' ol' Seth Bishop a yellin', tew, an' Sally was shriekin' aout that suthin' heavy hed struck the haouse not lightnin' nor nothin', but suthin' heavy agin' the front, that kep' a launchin' itself agin an' agin, though ye couldn't see nuthin' aout the front winders.
An' then ... an' then....''  Lines of fright deepened on every face and Armitage, shaken as he was, had barely poise enough to prompt the speaker.
''An' then ... Sally she yelled aout, 'O help, the haouse is a cavin' in' ... an' on the wire we could hoar a turrible crashin', an' a hull flock o' screamin' ... jest like when Elmer Frye's place was took, only wuss....''  The man paused, and another of the crowd spoke.
''That's all not a saound nor squeak over the 'phone arter that.
Jest still like.
We that heerd it got aout Fords an' wagons an' raounded up as many able bodied men folks as we could get, at Corey's place, an' come up here ter see what yew thought best ter dew.
Not but what I think it's the Lord's judgment fer our iniquities, that no mortal kin ever set aside.''
Armitage saw that the time for positive action had come, and spoke decisively to the faltering group of frightened rustics.
''We must follow it, boys.''
He made his voice as reassuring as possible.
''I believe there's a chance of putting it out of business.
You men know that those Whateleys were wizards well, this thing is a thing of wizardry, and must be put down by the same means.
I've seen Wilbur Whateley's diary and read some of the strange old books he used to read, and I think I know the right kind of a spell to recite to make the thing fade away.
Of course, one can't be sure, but we can always take a chance.
It's invisible I knew it would be but there's a powder in this long distance sprayer that might make it show up for a second.
Later on we'll try it.
It's a frightful thing to have alive, but it isn't as bad as what Wilbur would have let in if he'd lived longer.
You'll never know what the world has escaped.
Now we've only this one thing to fight, and it can't multiply.
It can, though, do a lot of harm so we mustn't hesitate to rid the community of it.
''We must follow it and the way to begin is to go to the place that has just been wrecked.
Let somebody lead the way I don't know your roads very well, but I've an idea there might be a shorter cut across lots.
How about it?''
The men shuffled about a moment, and then Earl Sawyer spoke softly, pointing with a grimy finger through the steadily lessening rain.
''I guess ye kin git to Seth Bishop's quickest by cuttin' acrost the lower medder here, wadin' the brook at the low place, an' climbin' through Carrier's mowin' an' the timber lot beyont.
That comes aout on the upper rud mighty nigh Seth's a leetle t'other side.''
Armitage, with Rice and Morgan, started to walk in the direction indicated and most of the natives followed slowly.
The sky was growing lighter, and there were signs that the storm had worn itself away.
When Armitage inadvertently took a wrong direction, Joe Osborn warned him and walked ahead to show the right one.
Courage and confidence were mounting though the twilight of the almost perpendicular wooded hill which lay toward the end of their short cut, and among whose fantastic ancient trees they had to scramble as if up a ladder, put these qualities to a severe test.
At length they emerged on a muddy road to find the sun coming out.
They were a little beyond the Seth Bishop place, but bent trees and hideously unmistakable tracks showed what had passed by.
Only a few moments were consumed in surveying the ruins just around the bend.
It was the Frye incident all over again, and nothing dead or living was found in either of the collapsed shells which had been the Bishop house and barn.
No one cared to remain there amidst the stench and the tarry stickiness, but all turned instinctively to the line of horrible prints leading on toward the wrecked Whateley farmhouse and the altar crowned slopes of Sentinel Hill.
As the men passed the site of Wilbur Whateley's abode they shuddered visibly, and seemed again to mix hesitancy with their zeal.
It was no joke tracking down something as big as a house that one could not see, but that had all the vicious malevolence of a demon.
Opposite the base of Sentinel Hill the tracks left the road, and there was a fresh bending and matting visible along the broad swath marking the monster's former route to and from the summit.
Armitage produced a pocket telescope of considerable power and scanned the steep green side of the hill.
Then he handed the instrument to Morgan, whose sight was keener.
After a moment of gazing Morgan cried out sharply, passing the glass to Earl Sawyer and indicating a certain spot on the slope with his finger.
Sawyer, as clumsy as most non users of optical devices are, fumbled a while but eventually focused the lenses with Armitage's aid.
When he did so his cry was less restrained than Morgan's had been.
''Gawd almighty, the grass an' bushes is a movin'!
It's a goin' up slow like creepin' up ter the top this minute, heaven only knows what fer!''
Then the germ of panic seemed to spread among the seekers.
It was one thing to chase the nameless entity, but quite another to find it.
Spells might be all right but suppose they weren't?
Voices began questioning Armitage about what he knew of the thing, and no reply seemed quite to satisfy.
Everyone seemed to feel himself in close proximity to phases of nature and of being utterly forbidden, and wholly outside the sane experience of mankind.
In the end the three men from Arkham old, white bearded Dr. Armitage, stocky, iron gray Professor Rice, and lean, youngish Dr. Morgan ascended the mountain alone.
After much patient instruction regarding its focusing and use, they left the telescope with the frightened group that remained in the road and as they climbed they were watched closely by those among whom the glass was passed around.
It was hard going, and Armitage had to be helped more than once.
High above the toiling group the great swath trembled as its hellish maker repassed with snail like deliberateness.
Then it was obvious that the pursuers were gaining.
Curtis Whateley of the undecayed branch was holding the telescope when the Arkham party detoured radically from the swath.
He told the crowd that the men were evidently trying to get to a subordinate peak which overlooked the swath at a point considerably ahead of where the shrubbery was now bending.
This, indeed, proved to be true and the party were seen to gain the minor elevation only a short time after the invisible blasphemy had passed it.
Then Wesley Corey, who had taken the glass, cried out that Armitage was adjusting the sprayer which Rice held, and that something must be about to happen.
The crowd stirred uneasily, recalling that this sprayer was expected to give the unseen horror a moment of visibility.
Two or three men shut their eyes, but Curtis Whateley snatched back the telescope and strained his vision to the utmost.
He saw that Rice, from the party's point of vantage above and behind the entity, had an excellent chance of spreading the potent powder with marvelous effect.
Those without the telescope saw only an instant's flash of gray cloud a cloud about the size of a moderately large building near the top of the mountain.
Curtis, who had held the instrument, dropped it with a piercing shriek into the ankle deep mud of the road.
He reeled, and would have crumpled to the ground had not two or three others seized and steadied him.
All he could do was moan half inaudibly  ''Oh, oh, great Gawd ... that ... that....''  There was a pandemonium of questioning, and only Henry Wheeler thought to rescue the fallen telescope and wipe it clean of mud.
Curtis was past all coherence, and even isolated replies were almost too much for him.
''Bigger 'n a barn ... all made o' squirmin' ropes ... hull thing sort o' shaped like a hen's egg bigger'n anything, with dozens o' legs like hogsheads that haff shut up when they step ... nothin' solid abaout it all like jelly, an' made o' sep'rit wrigglin' ropes pushed clost together ... great bulgin' eyes all over it ... ten or twenty maouths or trunks a stickin' aout all along the sides, big as stovepipes, an' all a tossin' an' openin' an' shuttin' ... all gray, with kinder blue or purple rings ... an' Gawd in Heaven that haff face on top!...''
This final memory, whatever it was, proved too much for poor Curtis, and he collapsed completely before he could say more.
Fred Farr and Will Hutchins carried him to the roadside and laid him on the damp grass.
Henry Wheeler, trembling, turned the rescued telescope on the mountain to see what he might.
Through the lenses were discernible three tiny figures, apparently running toward the summit as fast as the steep incline allowed.
Only these nothing more.
Then everyone noticed a strangely unseasonable noise in the deep valley behind, and even in the underbrush of Sentinel Hill itself.
It was the piping of unnumbered whippoorwills, and in their shrill chorus there seemed to lurk a note of tense and evil expectancy.
Earl Sawyer now took the telescope and reported the three figures as standing on the topmost ridge, virtually level with the altar stone but at a considerable distance from it.
One figure, he said, seemed to be raising its hands above its head at rhythmic intervals and as Sawyer mentioned the circumstance the crowd seemed to hear a faint, half musical sound from the distance, as if a loud chant were accompanying the gestures.
The weird silhouette on that remote peak must have been a spectacle of infinite grotesqueness and impressiveness, but no observer was in a mood for esthetic appreciation.
''I guess he's sayin' the spell,'' whispered Wheeler as he snatched back the telescope.
The whippoorwills were piping wildly, and in a singularly curious irregular rhythm quite unlike that of the visible ritual.
Suddenly the sunshine seemed to lessen without the intervention of any discernible cloud.
It was a very peculiar phenomenon, and was plainly marked by all.
A rumbling sound seemed brewing beneath the hills, mixed strangely with a concordant rumbling which clearly came from the sky.
Lightning flashed aloft, and the wondering crowd looked in vain for the portents of storm.
The chanting of the men from Arkham now became unmistakable, and Wheeler saw through the glass that they were all raising their arms in the rhythmic incantation.
From some farmhouse far away came the frantic barking of dogs.
The change in the quality of the daylight increased, and the crowd gazed about the horizon in wonder.
A purplish darkness, born of nothing more than a spectral deepening of the sky's blue, pressed down upon the rumbling hills.
Then the lightning flashed again, somewhat brighter than before, and the crowd fancied that it had showed a certain mistiness around the altar stone on the distant height.
No one, however, had been using the telescope at that instant.
The whippoorwills continued their irregular pulsation, and the men of Dunwich braced themselves tensely against some imponderable menace with which the atmosphere seemed surcharged.
Without warning came those deep, cracked, raucous vocal sounds which will never leave the memory of the stricken group who heard them.
Not from any human throat were they born, for the organs of man can yield no such acoustic perversions.
Rather would one have said they came from the pit itself, had not their source been so unmistakably the altar stone on the peak.
It is almost erroneous to call them sounds at all, since so much of their ghastly, infra bass timbre spoke to dim seats of consciousness and terror far subtler than the ear yet one must do so, since their form was indisputably though vaguely that of half articulate words.
They were loud loud as the rumblings and the thunder above which they echoed yet did they come from no visible being.
And because imagination might suggest a conjectural source in the world of non visible beings, the huddled crowd at the mountain's base huddled still closer, and winced as if in expectation of a blow.
''Ygnaiih ... ygnaiih ... thflthkh'ngha ... Yog Sothoth....'' rang the hideous croaking out of space.
''Y'bthnk ... h'ehye ... n'grkdl'lh....''  The speaking impulse seemed to falter here, as if some frightful psychic struggle were going on.
Henry Wheeler strained his eye at the telescope, but saw only the three grotesquely silhouetted human figures on the peak, all moving their arms furiously in strange gestures as their incantation drew near its culmination.
From what black wells of Acherontic fear or feeling, from what unplumbed gulfs of extra cosmic consciousness or obscure, long latent heredity, were those half articulate thunder croakings drawn?
Presently they began to gather renewed force and coherence as they grew in stark, utter, ultimate frenzy.
''Eh ya ya ya yahaah ... e'yaya yayaaaa ... ngh'aaaa ... ngh'aaaa ... h'yuh ... h'yuh ... HELP!
HELP!
... ff ff ff FATHER!
FATHER!
YOG SOTHOTH!...''
But that was all.
The pallid group in the road, still reeling at the indisputably English syllables that had poured thickly and thunderously down from the frantic vacancy beside that shocking altar stone, were never to hear such syllables again.
Instead, they jumped violently at the terrific report which seemed to rend the hills the deafening, cataclysmic peal whose source, be it inner earth or sky, no hearer was ever able to place.
A single lightning bolt shot from the purple zenith to the altar stone, and a great tidal wave of viewless force and indescribable stench swept down from the hill to all the countryside.
Trees, grass, and underbrush were whipped into a fury and the frightened crowd at the mountain's base, weakened by the lethal fetor that seemed about to asphyxiate them, were almost hurled off their feet.
Dogs howled from the distance, green grass and foliage wilted to a curious, sickly yellow gray, and over field and forest were scattered the bodies of dead whippoorwills.
The stench left quickly, but the vegetation never came right again.
To this day there is something queer and unholy about the growths on and around that fearsome hill.
Curtis Whateley was only just regaining consciousness when the Arkham men came slowly down the mountain in the beams of a sunlight once more brilliant and untainted.
They were grave and quiet, and seemed shaken by memories and reflections even more terrible than those which had reduced the group of natives to a state of cowed quivering.
In reply to a jumble of questions they only shook their heads and reaffirmed one vital fact.
''The thing has gone for ever,'' Armitage said.
''It has been split up into what it was originally made of, and can never exist again.
It was an impossibility in a normal world.
Only the least fraction was really matter in any sense we know.
It was like its father and most of it has gone back to him in some vague realm or dimension outside our material universe some vague abyss out of which only the most accursed rites of human blasphemy could ever have called him for a moment on the hills.''
There was a brief silence, and in that pause the scattered senses of poor Curtis Whateley began to knit back into a sort of continuity so that he put his hands to his head with a moan.
Memory seemed to pick itself up where it had left off, and the horror of the sight that had prostrated him burst in upon him again.
''Oh, oh, my Gawd, that haff face ... that haff face on top of it ... that face with the red eyes an' crinkly albino hair, an' no chin, like the Whateleys....
It was a octopus, centipede, spider kind o' thing, but they was a haff shaped man's face on top of it, an' it looked like Wizard Whateley's, only it was yards an' yards acrost....''  He paused exhausted, as the whole group of natives stared in a bewilderment not quite crystallized into fresh terror.
Only old Zebulon Whateley, who wanderingly remembered ancient things but who had been silent heretofore, spoke aloud.
''Fifteen year' gone,'' he rambled, ''I heerd Ol' Whateley say as haow some day we'd hear a child o' Lavinny's a callin' its father's name on the top o' Sentinel Hill....''  But Joe Osborn interrupted him to question the Arkham men anew.
''What was it, anyhaow, an' haowever did young Wizard Whateley call it aout o' the air it come from?''
Armitage chose his words carefully.
''It was well, it was mostly a kind of force that doesn't belong in our part of space a kind of force that acts and grows and shapes itself by other laws than those of our sort of Nature.
We have no business calling in such things from outside, and only very wicked people and very wicked cults ever try to.
There was some of it in Wilbur Whateley himself enough to make a devil and a precocious monster of him, and to make his passing out a pretty terrible sight.
I'm going to burn his accursed diary, and if you men are wise you'll dynamite that altar stone up there, and pull down all the rings of standing stones on the other hills.
Things like that brought down the beings those Whateleys were so fond of the beings they were going to let in tangibly to wipe out the human race and drag the earth off to some nameless place for some nameless purpose.
''But as to this thing we've just sent back the Whateleys raised it for a terrible part in the doings that were to come.
It grew fast and big from the same reason that Wilbur grew fast and big but it beat him because it had a greater share of the outsideness in it.
You needn't ask how Wilbur called it out of the air.
He didn't call it out.
It was his twin brother, but it looked more like the father than he did.''
I am forced into speech because men of science have refused to follow my advice without knowing why.
It is altogether against my will that I tell my reasons for opposing this contemplated invasion of the antarctic with its vast fossil hunt and its wholesale boring and melting of the ancient ice caps.
And I am the more reluctant because my warning may be in vain.
Doubt of the real facts, as I must reveal them, is inevitable yet, if I suppressed what will seem extravagant and incredible there would be nothing left.
The hitherto withheld photographs, both ordinary and aerial, will count in my favor, for they are damnably vivid and graphic.
Still, they will be doubted because of the great lengths to which clever fakery can be carried.
The ink drawings, of course, will be jeered at as obvious impostures notwithstanding a strangeness and technique which art experts ought to remark and puzzle over.
In the end I must rely on the judgment and standing of the few scientific leaders who have, on the one hand, sufficient independence of thought to weigh my data on its own hideously convincing merits or in the light of certain primordial and highly baffling myth cycles and on the other hand, sufficient influence to deter the exploring world in general from any rash and over ambitious program in the region of those mountains of madness.
It is an unfortunate fact that relatively obscure men like myself and my associates, connected only with a small university, have little chance of making an impression where matters of a wildly bizarre or highly controversial natures are concerned.
It is further against us that we are not, in the strictest sense, specialists in the fields which came primarily to be concerned.
As a geologist, my object in leading the Miskatonic University Expedition was wholly that of securing deep level specimens of rock and soil from various parts of the antarctic continent, aided by the remarkable drill devised by Professor Frank H. Pabodie of our engineering department.
I had no wish to be a pioneer in any other field than this, but I did hope that the use of this new mechanical appliance at different points along previously explored paths would bring to light materials of a sort hitherto unreached by the ordinary methods of collection.
Pabodie's drilling apparatus, as the public already knows from our reports, was unique and radical in its lightness, portability, and capacity to combine the ordinary Artesian drill principle with the principle of the small circular rock drill in such a way as to cope quickly with strata of varying hardness.
Steel head, jointed rods, gasoline motor, collapsible wooden derrick, dynamiting paraphernalia, cording, rubbish removal auger, and sectional piping for bores five inches wide and up to one thousand feet deep all formed, with needed accessories, no greater load than three seven dog sledges could carry.
This was made possible by the clever aluminum alloy of which most of the metal objects were fashioned.
Four large Dornier aeroplanes, designed especially for the tremendous altitude flying necessary on the antarctic plateau and with added fuel warming and quick starting devices worked out by Pabodie, could transport our entire expedition from a base at the edge of the great ice barrier to various suitable inland points, and from these points a sufficient quota of dogs would serve us.
We planned to cover as great an area as one antarctic season or longer, if absolutely necessary would permit, operating mostly in the mountain ranges and on the plateau south of Ross Sea regions explored in varying degree by Shackleton, Amundsen, Scott, and Byrd.
With frequent changes of camp, made by aeroplane and involving distances great enough to be of geological significance, we expected to unearth a quite unprecedented amount of material especially in the pre Cambrian strata of which so narrow a range of antarctic specimens had previously been secured.
We wished also to obtain as great as possible a variety of the upper fossiliferous rocks, since the primal life history of this bleak realm of ice and death is of the highest importance to our knowledge of the earth's past.
That the antarctic continent was once temperate and even tropical, with a teeming vegetable and animal life of which the lichens, marine fauna, arachnida, and penguins of the northern edge are the only survivors, is a matter of common information and we hoped to expand that information in variety, accuracy, and detail.
When a simple boring revealed fossiliferous signs, we would enlarge the aperture by blasting, in order to get specimens of suitable size and condition.
Our borings, of varying depth according to the promise held out by the upper soil or rock, were to be confined to exposed, or nearly exposed, land surfaces these inevitably being slopes and ridges because of the mile or two mile thickness of solid ice overlying the lower levels.
We could not afford to waste drilling depth on any considerable amount of more glaciation, though Pabodie had worked out a plan for sinking copper electrodes in thick clusters of borings and melting off limited areas of ice with current from a gasoline driven dynamo.
It is this plan which we could not put into effect except experimentally on an expedition such as ours that the coming Starkweather Moore Expedition proposes to follow, despite the warnings I have issued since our return from the antarctic.
The public knows of the Miskatonic Expedition through our frequent wireless reports to the Arkham Advertiser and Associated Press, and through the later articles by Pabodie and myself.
We consisted of four men from the University Pabodie, Lake of the biology department, Atwood of the physics department also a meteorologist and myself, representing geology and having nominal command, also sixteen assistants seven graduate students from Miskatonic and nine skilled mechanics.
Of these sixteen, twelve were qualified aeroplane pilots, all but two of whom were competent wireless operators.
Eight of them understood navigation with compass and sextant, as did Pabodie, Atwood and I.
In addition, of course, our two ships wooden exwhalers, reinforced for ice conditions and having auxiliary steam were fully manned.
The Nathaniel Derby Pickman Foundation, aided by a few special contributions, financed the expedition hence our preparations were extremely thorough, despite the absence of great publicity.
The dogs, sledges, machines, camp materials, and unassembled parts of our five planes were delivered in Boston, and there our ships were loaded.
We were marvelously well equipped for our specific purposes, and in all matters pertaining to supplies, regimen, transportation, and camp construction we profited by the excellent example of our many recent and exceptionally brilliant predecessors.
It was the unusual number and fame of these predecessors which made our own expedition ample though it was so little noticed by the world at large.
As the newspapers told, we sailed from Boston Harbor on September 2nd, 1930, taking a leisurely course down the coast and through the Panama Canal, and stopping at Samoa and Hobart, Tasmania, at which latter place we took on final supplies.
None of our exploring party had ever been in the polar regions before, hence we all relied greatly on our ship captains J.
B. Douglas, commanding the brig Arkham, and serving as commander of the sea party, and Georg Thorfinnssen, commanding the barque Miskatonic both veteran whalers in antarctic waters.
As we left the inhabited world behind the sun sank lower and lower in the north, and stayed longer and longer above the horizon each day.
At about 62 degrees South Latitude we sighted our first icebergs tablelike objects with vertical sides and just before reaching the antarctic circle, which we crossed on October 20th with appropriately quaint ceremonies, we were considerably troubled with field ice.
The falling temperature bothered me considerably after our long voyage through the tropics, but I tried to brace up for the worse rigors to come.
On many occasions the curious atmospheric effects enchanted me vastly these included a strikingly vivid mirage the first I had ever seen in which distant bergs became the battlements of unimaginable cosmic castles.
Pushing through the ice, which was fortunately neither extensive nor thickly packed, we regained open water at South Latitude 67 degrees, East Longitude 175 degrees.
On the morning of October 26th a strong land blink appeared on the south, and before noon we all felt a thrill of excitement at beholding a vast, lofty, and snow clad mountain chain which opened out and covered the whole vista ahead.
At last we had encountered an outpost of the great unknown continent and its cryptic world of frozen death.
These peaks were obviously the Admiralty Range discovered by Ross, and it would now be our task to round Cape Adare and sail down the east coast of Victoria Land to our contemplated base on the shore of McMurdo Sound, at the foot of the volcano Erebus in South Latitude 77 degrees 9'.
The last lap of the voyage was vivid and fancy stirring.
Great barren peaks of mystery loomed up constantly against the west as the low northern sun of noon or the still lower horizon grazing southern sun of midnight poured its hazy reddish rays over the white snow, bluish ice and water lanes, and black bits of exposed granite slope.
Through the desolate summits swept raging, intermittent gusts of the terrible antarctic wind, whose cadences sometimes held vague suggestions of a wild and half sentient musical piping, with notes extending over a wide range, and which for some subconscious mnemonic reason seemed to me disquieting and even dimly terrible.
Something about the scene reminded me of the strange and disturbing Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich, and of the still stranger and more disturbing descriptions of the evilly fabled plateau of Leng which occur in the dreaded Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred.
I was rather sorry, later on, that I had ever looked into that monstrous book at the college library.
On the 7th of November, sight of the westward range having been temporarily lost, we passed Franklin Island and the next day descried the cones of Mts.
Erebus and Terror on Ross Island ahead, with the long line of the Parry Mountains beyond.
There now stretched off to the east the low, white line of the great ice barrier, rising perpendicularly to a height of two hundred feet like the rocky cliffs of Quebec, and marking the end of southward navigation.
In the afternoon we entered McMurdo Sound and stood off the coast in the lee of smoking Mt.
Erebus.
The scoriaceous peak towered up some twelve thousand seven hundred feet against the eastern sky, like a Japanese print of the sacred Fujiyama, while beyond it rose the white, ghostlike height of Mt.
Terror, ten thousand nine hundred feet in altitude, and now extinct as a volcano.
Puffs of smoke from Erebus came intermittently, and one of the graduate assistants a brilliant young fellow named Danforth pointed out what looked like lava on the snowy slope, remarking that this mountain, discovered in 1840, had undoubtedly been the source of Poe's image when he wrote seven years later  '' the lavas that restlessly roll Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek In the ultimate climes of the pole  That groan as they roll down Mount Yaanek In the realms of the boreal pole.''
Danforth was a great reader of bizarre material, and had talked a good deal of Poe.
I was interested myself because of the antarctic scene of Poe's only long story the disturbing and enigmatical Arthur Gordon Pym.
On the barren shore, and on the lofty ice barrier in the background, myriad of grotesque penguins squawked and flapped their fins, while many fat seals were visible on the water, swimming or sprawling across large cakes of slowly drifting ice.
Using small boats, we effected a difficult landing on Ross Island shortly after midnight, on the morning of the 9th, carrying a line of cable from each of the ships and preparing to unload supplies by means of a breeches buoy arrangement.
Our sensations on first treading antarctic soil were poignant and complex, even though at this particular point the Scott and Shackleton expeditions had preceded us.
Our camp on the frozen shore below the volcano's slope was only a provisional one, headquarters being kept aboard the Arkham.
We landed all our drilling apparatus, dogs, sledges, tents, provisions, gasoline tanks, experimental ice melting outfit, cameras, both ordinary and aerial, aeroplane parts, and other accessories, including three small portable wireless outfits besides those in the planes capable of communicating with the Arkham's large outfit from any part of the antarctic continent that we would be likely to visit.
The ship's outfit, communicating with the outside world, was to convey press reports to the Arkham Advertiser's powerful wireless station on Kingsport Head, Mass.
We hoped to complete our work during a single antarctic summer but if this proved impossible we would winter on the Arkham, sending the Miskatonic north before the freezing of the ice for another summer's supplies.
I need not repeat what the newspapers have already published about our early work of our ascent of Mt.
Erebus our successful mineral borings at several points on Ross Island and the singular speed with which Pabodie's apparatus accomplished them, even through solid rock layers our provisional test of the small ice melting equipment our perilous ascent of the great barrier with sledges and supplies and our final assembling of five huge aeroplanes at the camp atop the barrier.
The health of our land party twenty men and fifty five Alaskan sledge dogs was remarkable, though of course we had so far encountered no really destructive temperatures or windstorms.
For the most part, the thermometer varied between zero and 20 degrees or 25 degrees above, and our experience with New England winters had accustomed us to rigors of this sort.
The barrier camp was semipermanent, and destined to be a storage cache for gasoline, provisions, dynamite, and other supplies.
Only four of our planes were needed to carry the actual exploring material, the fifth being left with a pilot and two men, from the ships, at the storage cache to form a means of reaching us from the Arkham in case all our exploring planes were lost.
Later, when not using all the other planes for moving apparatus, we would employ one or two in a shuttle transportation service between this cache and another permanent base on the great plateau from six hundred to seven hundred miles southward, beyond Beardmore Glacier.
Despite the almost unanimous accounts of appalling winds and tempests that pour down from the plateau, we determined to dispense with intermediate bases, taking our chances in the interest of economy and probable efficiency.
Wireless reports have spoken of the breathtaking, four hour, nonstop flight of our squadron on November 21st over the lofty shelf ice, with vast peaks rising on the west, and the unfathomed silences echoing to the sound of our engines.
Wind troubled us only moderately, and our radio compasses helped us through the one opaque fog we encountered.
When the vast rise loomed ahead, between Latitudes 83 degrees and 84 degrees, we knew we had reached Beardmore Glacier, the largest valley glacier in the world, and that the frozen sea was now giving place to a frowning and mountainous coast line.
At last we were truly entering the white, aeon dead world of the ultimate south.
Even as we realized it we saw the peak of Mt.
Nansen in the eastern distance, towering up to its height of almost fifteen thousand feet.
The successful establishment of the southern base above the glacier in Latitude 86 degrees 7', East Longitude 174 degrees 23', and the phenomenally rapid and effective borings and blastings made at various points reached by our sledge trips and short aeroplane flights, are matters of history as is the arduous and triumphant ascent of Mt.
Nansen by Pabodie and two of the graduate students Gedney and Carroll on December 13th to 15th.
We were some eight thousand five hundred feet above sea level.
When experimental drillings revealed solid ground only twelve feet down through the snow and ice at certain points, we made considerable use of the small melting apparatus and sunk bores and performed dynamiting at many places, where no previous explorer had ever thought of securing mineral specimens.
The pre Cambrian granites and beacon sandstones thus obtained confirmed our belief that this plateau was homogeneous, with the great bulk of the continent to the west, but somewhat different from the parts lying eastward below South America which we then thought to form a separate and smaller continent divided from the larger one by a frozen junction of Ross and Weddell Seas, though Byrd has since disproved the report.
In certain of the sandstones, dynamited and chiseled after boring revealed their nature, we found some highly interesting fossil markings and fragments notably ferns, seaweeds, trilobites, crinoids, and such mollusks as linguellae and gastropods all of which seemed of real significance in connection with the region's primordial history.
There was also a queer triangular, striated marking, about a foot in greatest diameter, which Lake pieced together from three fragments of slate brought up from a deep blasted aperture.
These fragments came from a point to the westward, near the Queen Alexandra Range and Lake, as a biologist, seemed to find their curious marking unusually puzzling and provocative, though to my geological eye it looked not unlike some of the ripple effects reasonably common in the sedimentary rocks.
Since slate is no more than a metamorphic formation into which a sedimentary stratum is pressed, and since the pressure itself produces odd distorting effects on any markings which may exist, I saw no reason for extreme wonder over the striated depression.
On January 6, 1931, Lake, Pabodie, Daniels, all six of the students, four mechanics, and myself flew directly over the south pole in two of the great planes, being forced down once by a sudden high wind, which, fortunately, did not develop into a typical storm.
This was, as the papers have stated, one of several observation flights, during others of which we tried to discern new topographical features in areas unreached by previous explorers.
Our early flights were disappointing in this latter respect, though they afforded us some magnificent examples of the richly fantastic and deceptive mirages of the polar regions, of which our sea voyage had given us some brief foretastes.
Distant mountains floated in the sky as enchanted cities, and often the whole white world would dissolve into a gold, silver, and scarlet land of Dunsanian dreams and adventurous expectancy under the magic of the low midnight sun.
On cloudy days we had considerable trouble in flying, owing to the tendency of snowy earth and sky to merge into one mystical opalescent void with no visible horizon to mark the junction of the two.
At length we resolved to carry out our original plan of flying five hundred miles eastward with all four exploring planes and establishing a fresh sub base at a point which would probably be on the smaller continental division, as we mistakenly conceived it.
Geological specimens obtained there would be desirable for purposes of comparison.
Our health so far had remained excellent lime juice well offsetting the steady diet of tinned and salted food, and temperatures generally above zero enabling us to do without our thickest furs.
It was now midsummer, and with haste and care we might be able to conclude work by March and avoid a tedious wintering through the long antarctic night.
Several savage windstorms had burst upon us from the west, but we had escaped damage through the skill of Atwood in devising rudimentary aeroplane shelters and windbreaks of heavy snow blocks, and in reinforcing the principal camp buildings with snow.
Our good luck and efficiency had indeed been almost uncanny.
The outside world knew, of course, of our program, and was told also of Lake's strange and dogged insistence on a westward or rather, northwestward prospecting trip before our radical shift to the new base.
It seems that he had pondered a great deal and with alarmingly radical daring over that triangular striated marking in the slate reading into it certain contradictions in nature and geological period which whetted his curiosity to the utmost, and made him avid to sink more borings and blastings in the west stretching formation to which the exhumed fragments evidently belonged.
He was strangely convinced that the marking was the print of some bulky, unknown, and radically unclassifiable organism of considerably advanced evolution, notwithstanding that the rock which bore it was of so vastly ancient a date Cambrian if not actually pre Cambrian as to preclude the probable existence not only of all highly evolved life, but of any life at all above the unicellular or at most the trilobite stage.
These fragments, with their odd marking, must have been five hundred million to a thousand million years old.
Popular imagination, I judge, responded actively to our wireless bulletins of Lake's start northwestward into regions never trodden by human foot or penetrated by human imagination, though we did not mention his wild hopes of revolutionizing the entire sciences of biology and geology.
His preliminary sledging and boring journey of January 11th to 18th with Pabodie and five others marred by the loss of two dogs in an upset when crossing one of the great pressure ridges in the ice had brought up more and more of the Archaean slate and even I was interested by the singular profusion of evident fossil markings in that unbelievably ancient stratum.
These markings, however, were of very primitive life forms involving no great paradox except that any life forms should occur in rock as definitely pre Cambrian as this seemed to be hence I still failed to see the good sense of Lake's demand for an interlude in our time saving program an interlude requiring the use of all four planes, many men, and the whole of the expedition's mechanical apparatus.
I did not, in the end, veto the plan, though I decided not to accompany the northwestward party despite Lake's plea for my geological advice.
While they were gone, I would remain at the base with Pabodie and five men and work out final plans for the eastward shift.
In preparation for this transfer, one of the planes had begun to move up a good gasoline supply from McMurdo Sound but this could wait temporarily.
I kept with me one sledge and nine dogs, since it is unwise to be at any time without possible transportation in an utterly tenantless world of aeon long death.
Lake's subexpedition into the unknown, as every one will recall, sent out its own reports from the short wave transmitters on the planes these being simultaneously picked up by our apparatus at the southern base and by the Arkham at McMurdo Sound, whence they were relayed to the outside world on wave lengths up to fifty meters.
The start was made January 22nd at 4 a.m. and the first wireless message we received came only two hours later, when Lake spoke of descending and starting a small scale ice melting and bore at a point some three hundred miles away from us.
Six hours after that a second and very excited message told of the frantic, beaverlike work whereby a shallow shaft had been sunk and blasted, culminating in the discovery of slate fragments with several markings approximately like the one which had caused the original puzzlement.
Three hours later a brief bulletin announced the resumption of the flight in the teeth of a raw and piercing gale and when I dispatched a message of protest against further hazards, Lake replied curtly that his new specimens made any hazard worth taking.
I saw that his excitement had reached the point of mutiny, and that I could do nothing to check this headlong risk of the whole expedition's success but it was appalling to think of his plunging deeper and deeper into that treacherous and sinister white immensity of tempests and unfathomed mysteries which stretched off for some fifteen hundred miles to the half known, half suspected coast line of Queen Mary and Knox Lands.
Then, in about an hour and a half more, came that doubly excited message from Lake's moving plane, which almost reversed my sentiments and made me wish I had accompanied the party  ''1005 p.m. On the wing.
After snowstorm, have spied mountain range ahead higher than any hitherto seen.
May equal Himalayas, allowing for height of plateau.
Probable Latitude 76 degrees 15', Longitude 113 degrees 10' E. Reaches far as can see to right and left.
Suspicion of two smoking cones.
All peaks black and bare of snow.
Gale blowing off them impedes navigation.''
After that Pabodie, the men, and I hung breathlessly over the receiver.
Thought of this titanic mountain rampart seven hundred miles away inflamed our deepest sense of adventure and we rejoiced that our expedition, if not ourselves personally, had been its discoverers.
In half an hour Lake called us again  ''Moulton's plane forced down on plateau in foothills, but nobody hurt and perhaps can repair.
Shall transfer essentials to other three for return or further moves if necessary, but no more heavy plane travel needed just now.
Mountains surpass anything in imagination.
Am going up scouting in Carroll's plane, with all weight out.
''You can't imagine anything like this.
Highest peaks must go over thirty five thousand feet.
Everest out of the running, Atwood to work out height with theodolite while Carroll and I go up.
Probably wrong about cones, for formations look stratified.
Possibly pre Cambrian slate with other strata mixed in.
Queer sky line effects regular sections of cubes clinging to highest peaks.
Whole thing marvelous in red gold light of low sun.
Like land of mystery in a dream or gateway to forbidden world of untrodden wonder.
Wish you were here to study.''
Though it was technically sleeping time, not one of us listeners thought for a moment of retiring.
It must have been a good deal the same at McMurdo Sound, where the supply cache and the Arkham were also getting the messages for Captain Douglas gave out a call congratulating everybody on the important find, and Sherman, the cache operator, seconded his sentiments.
We were sorry, of course, about the damaged aeroplane, but hoped it could be easily mended.
Then, at eleven p.m., came another call from Lake  ''Up with Carroll over highest foothills.
Don't dare try really tall peaks in present weather, but shall later.
Frightful work climbing, and hard going at this altitude, but worth it.
Great range fairly solid, hence can't get any glimpses beyond.
Main summits exceed Himalayas, and very queer.
Range looks like pre Cambrian slate, with plain signs of many other upheaved strata.
Was wrong about volcanism.
Goes farther in either direction than we can see.
Swept clear of snow above about twenty one thousand feet.
''Odd formations on slopes of highest mountains.
Great low square blocks with exactly vertical sides, and rectangular lines of low, vertical ramparts, like the old Asian castles clinging to steep mountains in Roerich's paintings.
Impressive from distance.
Flew close to some, and Carroll thought they were formed of smaller separate pieces, but that is probably weathering.
Most edges crumbled and rounded off as if exposed to storms and climate changes for millions of years.
''Parts, especially upper parts, seem to be of lighter colored rock than any visible strata on slopes proper, hence an evidently crystalline origin.
Close flying shows many cave mouths, some unusually regular in outline, square or semicircular.
You must come and investigate.
Think I saw rampart squarely on top of one peak.
Height seems about thirty thousand to thirty five thousand feet.
Am up twenty one thousand five hundred myself, in devilish, gnawing cold.
Wind whistles and pipes through passes and in and out of caves, but no flying danger so far.''
From then on for another half hour Lake kept up a running fire of comment, and expressed his intention of climbing some of the peaks on foot.
I replied that I would join him as soon as he could send a plane, and that Pabodie and I would work out the best gasoline plan just where and how to concentrate our supply in view of the expedition's altered character.
Obviously, Lake's boring operations, as well as his aeroplane activities, would need a great deal delivered at the new base which he was to establish at the foot of the mountains and it was possible that the eastward flight might not be made, after all, this season.
In connection with this business I called Captain Douglas and asked him to get as much as possible out of the ships and up the barrier with the single dog team we had left there.
A direct route across the unknown region between Lake and McMurdo Sound was what we really ought to establish.
Lake called me later to say that he had decided to let the camp stay where Moulton's plane had been forced down, and where repairs had already progressed somewhat.
The ice sheet was very thin, with dark ground here and there visible, and he would sink some borings and blasts at that very point before making any sledge trips or climbing expeditions.
He spoke of the ineffable majesty of the whole scene, and the queer state of his sensations at being in the lee of vast, silent pinnacles, whose ranks shot up like a wall reaching the sky at the world's rim.
Illustration It was a queer state of sensations being in the lee of vast, silent pinnacles, where ranks shot up like a wall reaching the sky at the world's rim.
Atwood's theodolite observations had placed the height of the five tallest peaks at from thirty thousand to thirty four thousand feet.
The windswept nature of the terrain clearly disturbed Lake, for it argued the occasional existence of prodigious gales, violent beyond anything we had so far encountered.
His camp lay a little more than five miles from where the higher foothills rose abruptly.
I could almost trace a note of subconscious alarm in his words flashed across a glacial void of seven hundred miles as he urged that we all hasten with the matter and get the strange, new region disposed of as soon as possible.
He was about to rest now, after a continuous day's work of almost unparalleled speed, strenuousness, and results.
In the morning I had a three cornered wireless talk with Lake and Captain Douglas at their widely separated bases.
It was agreed that one of Lake's planes would come to my base for Pabodie, the five men, and myself, as well as for all the fuel it could carry.
The rest of the fuel question, depending on our decision about an easterly trip, could wait for a few days, since Lake had enough for immediate camp heat and borings.
Eventually the old southern base ought to be restocked, but if we postponed the easterly trip we would not use it till the next summer, and, meanwhile, Lake must send a plane to explore a direct route between his new mountains and McMurdo Sound.
Pabodie and I prepared to close our base for a short or long period, as the case might be.
If we wintered in the antarctic we would probably fly straight from Lake's base to the Arkham without returning to this spot.
Some of our conical tents had already been reinforced by blocks of hard snow, and now we decided to complete the job of making a permanent village.
Owing to a very liberal tent supply, Lake had with him all that his base would need, even after our arrival.
I wirelessed that Pabodie and I would be ready for the northwestward move after one day's work and one night's rest.
Our labors, however, were not very steady after four p.m., for about that time Lake began sending in the most extraordinary and excited messages.
His working day had started unpropitiously, since an aeroplane survey of the nearly exposed rock surfaces showed an entire absence of those Archaean and primordial strata for which he was looking, and which formed so great a part of the colossal peaks that loomed up at a tantalizing distance from the camp.
Most of the rocks glimpsed were apparently Jurassic and Comanchean sandstones and Permian and Triassic schists, with now and then a glossy black outcropping suggesting a hard and slaty coal.
This rather discouraged Lake, whose plans all hinged on unearthing specimens more than five hundred million years older.
It was clear to him that in order to recover the Archaean slate vein in which he had found the odd markings, he would have to make a long sledge trip from these foothills to the steep slopes of the gigantic mountains themselves.
He had resolved, nevertheless, to do some local boring as part of the expedition's general program hence, he set up the drill and put five men to work with it while the rest finished settling the camp and repairing the damaged aeroplane.
The softest visible rock a sandstone about a quarter of a mile from the camp had been chosen for the first sampling and the drill made excellent progress without much supplementary blasting.
It was about three hours afterward, following the first really heavy blast of the operation, that the shouting of the drill crew was heard and that young Gedney the acting foreman rushed into the camp with the startling news.
They had struck a cave.
Early in the boring the sandstone had given place to a vein of Comanchean limestone, full of minute fossil cephalopods, corals, echini, and spirifera, and with occasional suggestions of siliceous sponges and marine vertebrate bones the latter probably of teliosts, sharks, and ganoids.
This, in itself, was important enough, as affording the first vertebrate fossils the expedition had yet secured but when shortly afterward the drill head dropped through the stratum into apparent vacancy, a wholly new and doubly intense wave of excitement spread among the excavators.
A good sized blast had laid open the subterrane secret and now, through a jagged aperture perhaps five feet across and three feet thick, there yawned before the avid searchers a section of shallow limestone hollowing worn more than fifty million years ago by the trickling ground waters of a bygone tropic world.
The hollowed layer was not more than seven or eight feet deep, but extended off indefinitely in all directions and had a fresh, slightly moving air which suggested its membership in an extensive subterranean system.
Its roof and floor were abundantly equipped with large stalactites and stalagmites, some of which met in columnar form.
But important above all else was the vast deposit of shells and bones, which in places nearly choked the passage.
Washed down from unknown jungles of Mesozoic tree ferns and fungi, and forests of Tertiary cycads, fan palms, and primitive angiosperms, this osseous medley contained representatives of more Cretaceous, Eocene, and other animal species than the greatest palaeontologist could have counted or classified in a year.
Mollusks, crustacean armor, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and early mammals great and small, known and unknown.
No wonder Gedney ran back to the camp shouting, and no wonder every one else dropped work and rushed headlong through the biting cold to where the tall derrick marked a new found gateway to secrets of inner earth and vanished aeons.
When Lake had satisfied the first keen edge of his curiosity he scribbled a message in his notebook and had young Moulton run back to the camp to dispatch it by wireless.
This was my first word of the discovery, and it told of the identification of early shells, bones of ganoids and placoderms, remnants of labyrinthodonta and thecoiidea, great mosasaur skull fragments, dinosaur vertebrae and armor plates, pterodactyl teeth and wing bones, Archaeopteryx debris, Miocene sharks' teeth, primitive bird skulls, and other bones of archaic mammals such as Palaeotheres, Xiphodons, Eohippi, Oreodons, and Titanotheriidae.
There was nothing as recent as a mastodon, elephant, true camel, deer, or bovine animal hence Lake concluded that the last deposits had occurred during the Oligocene Age, and that the hollowed stratum had lain in its present dried, dead, and inaccessible state for at least thirty million years.
On the other hand, the prevalence of very early life forms was singular in the highest degree.
Though the limestone formation was, on the evidence of such typical imbedded fossils as ventriculites, positively and unmistakably Comanchean and not a particle earlier the free fragments in the hollow space included a surprising proportion from organisms hitherto considered as peculiar to far older periods even rudimentary fishes, mollusks, and corals as remote as the Silurian or Ordovician.
The inevitable inference was that in this part of the world there had been a remarkable and unique degree of continuity between the life of over three hundred million years ago and that of only thirty million years ago.
How far this continuity had extended beyond the Oligocene Age when the cavern was closed was of course past all speculation.
In any event, the coming of the frightful ice in the Pleistocene some five hundred thousand years ago a mere yesterday as compared with the age of this cavity must have put an end to any of the primal forms which had locally managed to outlive their common terms.
Lake was not content to let his first message stand, but had another bulletin written and dispatched across the snow to the camp before Moulton could get back.
After that Moulton stayed at the wireless in one of the planes, transmitting to me and to the Arkham for relaying to the outside world the frequent postscripts which Lake sent him by a succession of messengers.
Those who followed the newspapers will remember the excitement created among men of science by that afternoon's reports reports which have finally led, after all these years, to the organization of that very Starkweather Moore Expedition which I am so anxious to dissuade from its purposes.
I had better give the messages literally as Lake sent them, and as our base operator McTighe translated them from his pencil shorthand  Fowler makes discovery of highest importance in sandstone and limestone fragments from blasts.
Several distinct triangular striated prints like those in archaean slate, proving that source survived from over six hundred million years ago to Comanchean times without more than moderate morphological changes and decrease in average size.
Comanchean prints apparently more primitive or decadent, if anything, than older ones.
Emphasize importance of discovery in press.
Will mean to biology what Einstein has meant to mathematics and physics.
Joins up with my previous work and amplifies conclusions.
Appears to indicate, as I suspected, that earth has seen whole cycle or cycles of organic life before known one that begins with Archaeozoic cells.
Was evolved and specialized not later than a thousand million years ago, when planet was young and recently uninhabitable for any life forms of normal protoplasmic structure.
Question arises when, where, and how development took place.
Later.
Examining certain skeletal fragments of large land and marine saurians and primitive mammals, find singular local wounds or injuries to bony structure not attributable to any known predatory or carnivorous animal of any period.
Of two sorts straight, penetrant bores, and apparently hacking incisions.
One or two cases of cleanly severed bones.
Not many specimens affected.
Am sending to camp for electric torches.
Will extend search area underground by hacking away stalactites.
Still later.
Have found peculiar soapstone fragment about six inches across and an inch and a half thick, wholly unlike any visible local formation greenish, but no evidences to place its period.
Has curious smoothness and regularity.
Shaped like five pointed star with tips broken off, and signs of other cleavage at inward angles and in center of surface.
Small, smooth depression in center of unbroken surface.
Arouses much curiosity as to source and weathering.
Probably some freak of water action.
Carroll, with magnifier, thinks he can make out additional markings of geologic significance.
Groups of tiny dots in regular patterns.
Dogs growing uneasy as we work, and seem to hate this soapstone.
Must see if it has any peculiar odor.
Will report again when Mills gets back with light and we start on underground area.
1015 p.m.
Important discovery.
Orrendorf and Watkins, working underground at 945 with light, found monstrous barrel shaped fossil of wholly unknown nature probably vegetable unless overgrown specimen of unknown marine radiata.
Tissue evidently preserved by mineral salts.
Tough as leather, but astonishing flexibility retained in places.
Marks of broken off parts at ends and around sides.
Six feet end to end, three and five tenths feet central diameter, tapering to one foot at each end.
Like a barrel with five bulging ridges in place of staves.
Lateral breakages, as of thinnish stalks, are at equator in middle of these ridges.
In furrows between ridges are curious growths combs or wings that fold up and spread out like fans.
All greatly damaged but one, which gives almost seven foot wing spread.
Arrangement reminds one of certain monsters of primal myth, especially fabled Elder Things in Necronomicon.
These wings seem to be membranous, stretched on framework of glandular tubing.
Apparent minute orifices in frame tubing at wing tips.
Ends of body shriveled, giving no clue to interior or to what has been broken off there.
Must dissect when we get back to camp.
Can't decide whether vegetable or animal.
Many features obviously of almost incredible primitiveness.
Have set all hands cutting stalactites and looking for further specimens.
Additional scarred bones found, but these must wait.
Having trouble with dogs.
They can't endure the new specimen, and would probably tear it to pieces if we didn't keep it at a distance from them.
1130 p.m.
Attention, Dyer, Pabodie, Douglas.
Matter of highest I might say transcendent importance.
Arkham must relay to Kingsport Head Station at once.
Strange barrel growth is the archaean thing that left prints in rocks.
Mills, Boudreau, and Fowler discover cluster of thirteen more at underground point forty feet from aperture.
Mixed with curiously rounded and configured soapstone fragments smaller than one previously found star shaped, but no marks of breakage except at some of the points.
Of organic specimens, eight apparently perfect, with all appendages.
Have brought all to surface, leading off dogs to distance.
They cannot stand the things.
Give close attention to description and repeat back for accuracy.
Papers must get this right.
Objects are eight feet long all over.
Six foot, five ridged barrel torso three and five tenths feet central diameter, one foot end diameters.
Dark gray, flexible, and infinitely tough.
Seven foot membranous wings of same color, found folded, spread out of furrows between ridges.
Wing framework tubular or glandular, or lighter gray, with orifices at wing tips.
Spread wings have serrated edge.
Around equator, one at central apex of each of the five vertical, stavelike ridges, are five systems of light gray flexible arms or tentacles found tightly folded to torso but expansible to maximum length of over three feet.
Like arms of primitive crinoid.
Single stalks three inches diameter branch after six inches into five substalks, each of which branches after eight inches into five small, tapering tentacles or tendrils, giving each stalk a total of twenty five tentacles.
At top of torso blunt, bulbous neck of lighter gray, with gill like suggestions, holds yellowish five pointed starfish shaped apparent head covered with three inch wiry cilia of various prismatic colors.
Head thick and puffy, about two feet point to point, with three inch flexible yellowish tubes projecting from each point.
Slit in exact center of top probably breathing aperture.
At end of each tube is spherical expansion where yellowish membrane rolls back on handling to reveal glassy, red irised globe, evidently an eye.
Five slightly longer reddish tubes start from inner angles of starfish shaped head and end in saclike swellings of same color which, upon pressure, open to bell shaped orifices two inches maximum diameter and lined with sharp, white tooth like projections probable mouths.
All these tubes, cilia, and points of starfish head, found folded tightly down tubes and points clinging to bulbous neck and torso.
Flexibility surprising despite vast toughness.
At bottom of torso, rough but dissimilarly functioning counterparts of head arrangements exist.
Bulbous light gray pseudoneck, without gill suggestions, holds greenish five pointed starfish arrangement.
Tough, muscular arms four feet long and tapering from seven inches diameter at base to about two and five tenths at point.
To each point is attached small end of a greenish five veined membranous triangle eight inches long and six wide at farther end.
This is the paddle, fin, or pseudofoot which had made prints in rocks from a thousand million to fifty or sixty million years old.
From inner angles of starfish arrangement project two foot reddish tubes tapering from three inches diameter at base to one at tip.
Orifices at tips.
All these parts infinitely tough and leathery, but extremely flexible.
Four foot arms with paddles undoubtedly used for locomotion of some sort, marine or otherwise.
When moved, display suggestions of exaggerated muscularity.
As found, all these projections tightly folded over pseudoneck and end of torso, corresponding to projections at other end.
Cannot yet assign positively to animal or vegetable kingdom, but odds now favor animal.
Probably represents incredibly advanced evolution of radiata without loss of certain primitive features.
Echinoderm resemblances unmistakable despite local contradictory evidences.
Wing structure puzzles in view of probable marine habitat, but may have use in water navigation.
Symmetry is curiously vegetablelike, suggesting vegetable's essential up and down structure rather than animal's fore and aft structure.
Fabulously early date of evolution, preceding even simplest archaean Protozoa hitherto known, baffles all conjecture as to origin.
Complete specimens have such uncanny resemblance to certain creatures of primal myth that suggestion of ancient existence outside antarctic becomes inevitable.
Dyer and Pabodie have read Necronomicon and seen Clark Ashton Smith's nightmare paintings based on text, and will understand when I speak of Elder Things supposed to have created all earth life as jest or mistake.
Students have always thought conception formed from morbid imaginative treatment of very ancient tropical radiata.
Also like prehistoric folklore things Wilmarth has spoken of Cthulhu cult appendages, etc.
Vast field of study opened.
Deposits probably of late Cretaceous or early Eocene period, judging from associated specimens.
Massive stalagmites deposited above them.
Hard work hewing out, but toughness prevented damage.
State of preservation miraculous, evidently owing to limestone action.
No more found so far, but will resume search later.
Job now to get fourteen huge specimens to camp without dogs, which bark furiously and can't be trusted near them.
With nine men three left to guard the dogs we ought to manage the three sledges fairly well, though wind is bad.
Must establish plane communication with McMurdo Sound and begin shipping material.
But I've got to dissect one of these things before we take any rest.
Wish I had a real laboratory here.
Dyer better kick himself for having tried to stop my westward trip.
First the world's greatest mountains, and then this.
If this last isn't the high spot of the expedition, I don't know what is.
We're made scientifically.
Congrats, Pabodie, on the drill that opened up the cave.
Now will Arkham please repeat description?
The sensations of Pabodie and myself at receipt of this report were almost beyond description, nor were our companions much behind us in enthusiasm.
McTighe, who had hastily translated a few high spots as they came from the droning receiving set, wrote out the entire message from his shorthand version, as soon as Lake's operator signed off.
All appreciated the epoch making significance of the discovery, and I sent Lake congratulations as soon as the Arkham's operator had repeated back the descriptive parts as requested and my example was followed by Sherman from his station at the McMurdo Sound supply cache, as well as by Captain Douglas of the Arkham.
Later, as head of the expedition, I added some remarks to be relayed through the Arkham to the outside world.
Of course, rest was an absurd thought amidst this excitement and my only wish was to get to Lake's camp as quickly as I could.
It disappointed me when he sent word that a rising mountain gale made early aerial travel impossible.
But within an hour and a half interest again rose to banish disappointment.
Lake, sending more messages, told of the completely successful transportation of the fourteen great specimens to the camp.
It had been a hard pull, for the things were surprisingly heavy but nine men had accomplished it very neatly.
Now some of the party were hurriedly building a snow corral at a safe distance from the camp, to which the dogs could be brought for greater convenience in feeding.
The specimens were laid out on the hard snow near the camp, save for one on which Lake was making crude attempts at dissection.
This dissection seemed to be a greater task than had been expected, for, despite the heat of a gasoline stove in the newly raised laboratory tent, the deceptively flexible tissues of the chosen specimen a powerful and intact one lost nothing of their more than leathery toughness.
Lake was puzzled as to how he might make the requisite incisions without violence destructive enough to upset all the structural niceties he was looking for.
He had, it is true, seven more perfect specimens but these were too few to use up recklessly unless the cave might later yield an unlimited supply.
Accordingly, he removed the specimen and dragged in one which, though having remnants of the starfish arrangements at both ends, was badly crushed and partly disrupted along one of the great torso furrows.
Results, quickly reported over the wireless, were baffling and provocative indeed.
Nothing like delicacy or accuracy was possible with instruments hardly able to cut the anomalous tissue, but the little that was achieved left us all awed and bewildered.
Existing biology would have to be wholly revised, for this thing was no product of any cell growth science knows about.
There had been scarcely any mineral replacement, and despite an age of perhaps forty million years the internal organs were wholly intact.
The leathery, undeteriorative, and almost indestructible quality was an inherent attribute of the thing's form of organization, and pertained to some paleocene cycle of invertebrate evolution utterly beyond our powers of speculation.
At first all that Lake found was dry, but as the heated tent produced its thawing effect, organic moisture of pungent and offensive odor was encountered toward the thing's uninjured side.
It was not blood, but a thick, dark green fluid apparently answering the same purpose.
By the time Lake reached this stage all thirty seven dogs had been brought to the still uncompleted corral near the camp, and even at that distance set up a savage barking and show of restlessness at the acrid, diffusive smell.
Far from helping to place the strange entity, this provisional dissection merely deepened its mystery.
All guesses about its external members had been correct, and on the evidence of these one could hardly hesitate to call the thing animal, but internal inspection brought up so many vegetable evidences that Lake was left hopelessly at sea.
It had digestion and circulation, and eliminated waste matter through the reddish tubes of its starfish shaped base.
Cursorily, one would say that its respiratory apparatus handled oxygen rather than carbon dioxide and there were odd evidences of air storage chambers and methods of shifting respiration from the external orifice to at least two other fully developed breathing systems gills and pores.
Clearly, it was amphibian and probably adapted to long airless hibernation periods as well.
Vocal organs seemed present in connection with the main respiratory system, but they presented anomalies beyond immediate solution.
Articulate speech, in the sense of syllable utterance, seemed barely conceivable, but musical piping notes covering a wide range were highly probable.
The muscular system was almost pre naturally developed.
The nervous system was so complex and highly developed as to leave Lake aghast.
Though excessively primitive and archaic in some respects, the thing had a set of gangliar centers and connectives arguing the very extremes of specialized development.
Its five lobed brain was surprisingly advanced, and there were signs of a sensory equipment, served in part through the wiry cilia of the head, involving factors alien to any other terrestrial organism.
Probably it had more than five senses, so that its habits could not be predicted from any existing analogy.
It must, Lake thought, have been a creature of keen sensitiveness and delicately differentiated functions in its primal world much like the ants and bees of to day.
It reproduced like the vegetable cryptogams, especially the pteridophyta having spore cases at the tips of the wings and evidently developing from a thallus or prothallus.
But to give it a name at this stage was mere folly.
It looked like a radiate, but was clearly something more.
It was partly vegetable, but had three fourths of the essentials of animal structure.
That it was marine in origin, its symmetrical contour and certain other attributes clearly indicated yet one could not be exact as to the limit of its later adaptations.
The wings, after all, held a persistent suggestion of the aerial.
How it could have undergone its tremendously complex evolution on a new born earth in time to leave prints in archaean rocks was so far beyond conception as to make Lake whimsically recall the primal myths about Great Old Ones who filtered down from the stars and concocted earth life as a joke or mistake and the wild tales of cosmic hill things from outside told by a folklorist colleague in Miskatonic's English department.
Naturally, he considered the possibility of the pre Cambrian prints having been made by a less evolved ancestor of the present specimens, but quickly rejected this too facile theory upon considering the advanced structural qualities of the older fossils.
If anything, the later contours showed decadence rather than higher evolution.
The size of the pseudofeet had decreased, and the whole morphology seemed coarsened and simplified.
Moreover, the nerves and organs, just examined, held singular suggestions of retrogression from forms still more complex.
Atrophied and vestigial parts were surprisingly prevalent.
Altogether, little could be said to have been solved and Lake fell back on mythology for a provisional name jocosely dubbing his finds ''The Elder Ones.''
At about two thirty a.m., having decided to postpone further work and get a little rest, he covered the dissected organism with a tarpaulin, emerged from the laboratory tent, and studied the intact specimens with renewed interest.
The ceaseless antarctic sun had begun to limber up their tissues a trifle, so that the head points and tubes of two or three showed signs of unfolding but Lake did not believe there was any danger of immediate decomposition in the almost subzero air.
He did, however, move all the undissected specimens closer together and throw a spare tent over them in order to keep off the direct solar rays.
That would also help to keep their possible scent away from the dogs, whose hostile unrest was really becoming a problem, even at their substantial distance and behind the higher and higher snow walls, which an increased quota of the men were hastening to raise around their quarters.
He had to weight down the corners of the tent cloth with heavy blocks of snow to hold it in place amidst the rising gale, for the titan mountains seemed about to deliver some gravely severe blasts.
Early apprehensions about sudden antarctic winds were revived, and under Atwood's supervision precautions were taken to bank the tents, new dog corral, and crude aeroplane shelters with snow, on the mountainward side.
These latter shelters, begun with hard snow blocks during odd moments, were by no means as high as they should have been and Lake finally detached all hands from other tasks to work on them.
It was after four when Lake at last prepared to sign off and advised us all to share the rest period his outfit would take when the shelter walls were a little higher.
He held some friendly chat with Pabodie over the ether, and repeated his praise of the really marvelous drills that had helped him make his discovery.
Atwood also sent greetings and praises.
I gave Lake a warm word of congratulation, owning up that he was right about the western trip, and we all agreed to get in touch by wireless at ten in the morning.
If the gale was then over, Lake would send a plane for the party at my base.
Just before retiring I dispatched a final message to the Arkham, with instructions about toning down the day's news for the outside world, since the full details seemed radical enough to rouse a wave of incredulity until further substantiated.
None of us, I imagine, slept very heavily or continuously that morning.
Both the excitement of Lake's discovery and the mounting fury of the wind were against such a thing.
So savage was the blast even where we were, that we could not help wondering how much worse it was at Lake's camp, directly under the vast unknown peaks that bred and delivered it.
McTighe was awake at ten o'clock and tried to get Lake on the wireless, as agreed, but some electrical condition in the disturbed air to the westward seemed to prevent communication.
We did, however, get the Arkham, and Douglas told me that he had likewise been vainly trying to reach Lake.
He had not known about the wind, for very little was blowing at McMurdo Sound, despite its persistent rage where we were.
Throughout the day we all listened anxiously and tried to get Lake at intervals, but invariably without results.
About noon a positive frenzy of wind stampeded out of the west, causing us to fear for the safety of our camp but it eventually died down, with only a moderate relapse at two p.m.  After three o'clock it was very quiet, and we redoubled our efforts to get Lake.
Reflecting that he had four planes, each provided with an excellent short wave outfit, we could not imagine any ordinary accident capable of crippling all his wireless equipment at once.
Nevertheless, the stony silence continued, and when we thought of the delirious force the wind must have had in his locality we could not help making the most direful conjectures.
By six o'clock our fears had become intense and definite, and after a wireless consultation with Douglas and Thorfinnssen I resolved to take steps toward investigation.
The fifth aeroplane, which we had left at the McMurdo Sound supply cache with Sherman and two sailors, was in good shape and ready for instant use, and it seemed that the very emergency for which it had been saved was now upon us.
I got Sherman by wireless and ordered him to join me with the plane and the two sailors at the southern base as quickly as possible, the air conditions being apparently highly favorable.
We then talked over the personnel of the coming investigation party, and decided that we would include all hands, together with the sledge and dogs which I had kept with me.
Even so great a load would not be too much for one of the huge planes built to our special orders for heavy machinery transportation.
At intervals I still tried to reach Lake with the wireless, but all to no purpose.
Sherman, with the sailors Gunnarsson and Larsen, took off at seven thirty and reported a quiet flight from several points on the wing.
They arrived at our base at midnight, and all hands at once discussed the next move.
It was risky business sailing over the antarctic in a single aeroplane without any line of bases, but no one drew back from what seemed like the plainest necessity.
We turned in at two o'clock for a brief rest after some preliminary loading of the plane, but were up again in four hours to finish the loading and packing.
At seven fifteen a.m., January 25th, we started northwestward under McTighe's pilotage with ten men, seven dogs, a sledge, a fuel and food supply, and other items including the plane's wireless outfit.
The atmosphere was clear, fairly quiet, and relatively mild in temperature, and we anticipated very little trouble in reaching the latitude and longitude designated by Lake as the site of his camp.
Our apprehensions were over what we might find, or fail to find, at the end of our journey, for silence continued to answer all calls dispatched to the camp.
Every incident of that four and a half hour flight is burned into my recollection because of its crucial position in my life.
It marked my loss, at the age of fifty four, of all that peace and balance which the normal mind possesses through its accustomed conception of external nature and nature's laws.
Thenceforward the ten of us but the student Danforth and myself above all others were to face a hideously amplified world of lurking horrors which nothing can erase from our emotions, and which we would refrain from sharing with mankind in general if we could.
The newspapers have printed the bulletins we sent from the moving plane, telling of our nonstop course, our two battles with treacherous upper air gales, our glimpse of the broken surface where Lake had sunk his mid journey shaft three days before, and our sight of a group of those strange fluffy snow cylinders noted by Amundsen and Byrd as rolling in the wind across the endless leagues of frozen plateau.
There came a point, though, when our sensations could not be conveyed in any words the press would understand, and a later point when we had to adopt an actual rule of strict censorship.
The sailor Larsen was first to spy the jagged line of witchlike cones and pinnacles ahead, and his shouts sent every one to the windows of the great cabined plane.
Despite our speed, they were very slow in gaining prominence hence we knew that they must be infinitely far off, and visible only because of their abnormal height.
Little by little, however, they rose grimly into the western sky, allowing us to distinguish various bare, bleak, blackish summits, and to catch the curious sense of phantasy which they inspired as seen in the reddish antarctic light against the provocative background of iridescent ice dust clouds.
In the whole spectacle there was a persistent, pervasive hint of stupendous secrecy and potential revelation.
It was as if these stark, nightmare spires marked the pylons of a frightful gateway into forbidden spheres of dream, and complex gulfs of remote time, space, and ultradimensionality.
I could not help feeling that they were evil things mountains of madness whose farther slopes looked out over some accursed ultimate abyss.
That seething, half luminous cloud background held ineffable suggestions of a vague, ethereal beyondness far more than terrestrially spatial, and gave appalling reminders of the utter remoteness, separateness, desolation, and aeon long death of this untrodden and unfathomed austral world.
It was young Danforth who drew our notice to the curious regularities of the higher mountain sky line regularities like clinging fragments of perfect cubes, which Lake had mentioned in his messages, and which indeed justified his comparison with the dreamlike suggestions of primordial temple ruins, on cloudy Asian mountaintops so subtly and strangely painted by Roerich.
There was indeed something hauntingly Roerichlike about this whole unearthly continent of mountainous mystery.
I had felt it in October when we first caught sight of Victoria Land, and I felt it afresh now.
I felt, too, another wave of uneasy consciousness of archaean mythical resemblances, of how disturbingly this lethal realm corresponded to the evilly famed plateau of Leng in the primal writings.
Mythologists have placed Leng in Central Asia, but the racial memory of man or of his predecessors is long, and it may well be that certain tales have come down from lands and mountains and temples of horror earlier than Asia and earlier than any human world we know.
A few daring mystics have hinted at a pre Pleistocene origin for the fragmentary Pnakotic Manuscripts, and have suggested that the devotees of Tsathoggua were as alien to mankind as Tsathoggua itself.
Leng, wherever in space or time it might brood, was not a region I would care to be in or near, nor did I relish the proximity of a world that had ever bred such ambiguous and archaean monstrosities as those Lake had just mentioned.
At the moment I felt sorry that I had ever read the abhorred Necronomicon, or talked so much with that unpleasantly erudite folklorist Wilmarth at the university.
This mood undoubtedly served to aggravate my reaction to the bizarre mirage which burst upon us from the increasingly opalescent zenith as we drew near the mountains and began to make out the cumulative undulations of the foothills.
I had seen dozens of polar mirages during the preceding weeks, some of them quite as uncanny and fantastically vivid as the present sample, but this one had a wholly novel and obscure quality of menacing symbolism, and I shuddered as the seething labyrinth of fabulous walls and towers and minarets loomed out of the troubled ice vapors above our heads.
The effect was that of a Cyclopean city of no architecture known to man or to human imagination, with vast aggregations of night black masonry embodying monstrous perversions of geometrical laws.
There were truncated cones, sometimes terraced or fluted, surmounted by tall cylindrical shafts here and there bulbously enlarged and often capped with tiers of thinnish scalloped disks, and strange, beetling, tablelike constructions suggesting piles of multitudinous rectangular slabs or circular plates or five pointed stars with each one overlapping the one beneath.
There were composite cones and pyramids either alone or surmounting cylinders or cubes or flatter truncated cones and pyramids, and occasional needlelike spires in curious clusters of five.
All of these febrile structures seemed knit together by tubular bridges crossing from one to the other at various dizzy heights, and the implied scale of the whole was terrifying and oppressive in its sheer giganticism.
The general type of mirage was not unlike some of the wilder forms observed and drawn by the arctic whaler Scoresby in 1820, but at this time and place, with those dark, unknown mountain peaks soaring stupendously ahead, that anomalous elder world discovery in our minds, and the pall of probable disaster enveloping the greater part of our expedition, we all seemed to find in it a taint of latent malignity and infinitely evil portent.
I was glad when the mirage began to break up, though in the process the various nightmare turrets and cones assumed distorted, temporary forms of even vaster hideousness.
As the whole illusion dissolved to churning opalescence, we began to look earthward again, and saw that our journey's end was not far off.
The unknown mountains ahead rose dizzily up like a fearsome rampart of giants, their curious regularities showing with startling clearness even without a field glass.
We were over the lowest foothills now, and could see amidst the snow, ice, and bare patches of their main plateau a couple of darkish spots which we took to be Lake's camp and boring.
The higher foothills shot up between five and six miles away, forming a range almost distinct from the terrifying line of more than Himalayan peaks beyond them.
At length Ropes the student who had relieved McTighe at the controls began to head downward toward the left hand dark spot whose size marked it as the camp.
As he did so, McTighe sent out the last uncensored wireless message the world was to receive from our expedition.
Every one, of course, has read the brief and unsatisfying bulletins of the rest of our antarctic sojourn.
Some hours after our landing we sent a guarded report of the tragedy we found, and reluctantly announced the wiping out of the whole Lake party by the frightful wind of the preceding day, or of the night before that.
There were eleven known dead, young Gedney was missing.
People pardoned our hazy lack of details through realization of the shock the sad event must have caused us, and believed us when we explained that the mangling action of the wind had rendered all eleven bodies unsuitable for transportation outside.
Indeed, I flatter myself that even in the midst of our distress, utter bewilderment, and soul clutching horror, we scarcely went beyond the truth in any specific instance.
The tremendous significance lies in what we dared not tell what I would not tell now but for the need of warning others off from nameless terrors.
It is a fact that the wind had wrought dreadful havoc.
Whether all could have lived through it, even without the other thing, is gravely open to doubt.
The storm, with its fury of madly driven ice particles, must have been beyond anything our expedition had encountered before.
One aeroplane shelter all, it seems, had been left in a far too flimsy and inadequate state was nearly pulverized and the derrick at the distant boring was entirely shaken to pieces.
The exposed metal of the grounded planes and drilling machinery was bruised into a high polish, and two of the small tents were flattened despite their snow banking.
Wooden surfaces left out in the blast were pitted and denuded of paint, and all signs of tracks in the snow were completely obliterated.
It is also true that we found none of the archaean biological objects in a condition to take outside as a whole.
We did gather some minerals from a vast, tumbled pile, including several of the greenish soapstone fragments whose odd five pointed rounding and faint patterns of grouped dots caused so many doubtful comparisons, and some fossil bones, among which were the most typical of the curiously injured specimens.
None of the dogs survived, their hurriedly built snow inclosure near the camp being almost wholly destroyed.
The wind may have done that, though the greater breakage, on the side next to the camp, which was not the windward one, suggests an outward leap or break of the frantic beasts themselves.
All three sledges were gone, and we have tried to explain that the wind may have blown them off into the unknown.
The drill and ice melting machinery at the boring were too badly damaged to warrant salvage, so we used them to choke up that subtly disturbing gateway to the past which Lake had blasted.
We likewise left at the camp the two most shaken up of the planes since our surviving party had only four real pilots Sherman, Danforth, McTighe, and Ropes in all, with Danforth in a poor nervous shape to navigate.
We brought back all the books, scientific equipment, and other incidentals we could find, though much was rather unaccountably blown away.
Spare tents and furs were either missing or badly out of condition.
It was approximately four p.m., after wide plane cruising had forced us to give Gedney up for lost, that we sent our guarded message to the Arkham for relaying and I think we did well to keep it as calm and noncommittal as we succeeded in doing.
The most we said about agitation concerned our dogs, whose frantic uneasiness near the biological specimens was to be expected from poor Lake's accounts.
We did not mention, I think, their display of the same uneasiness when sniffing around the queer greenish soapstones and certain other objects in the disordered region objects including scientific instruments, aeroplanes, and machinery, both at the camp and at the boring, whose parts had been loosened, moved, or otherwise tampered with by winds that must have harbored singular curiosity and investigativeness.
About the fourteen biological specimens we were pardonably indefinite.
We said that the only ones we discovered were damaged, but that enough was left of them to prove Lake's description wholly and impressively accurate.
It was hard work keeping our personal emotions out of this matter and we did not mention numbers or say exactly how we had found those which we did find.
We had by that time agreed not to transmit anything suggesting madness on the part of Lake's men, and it surely looked like madness to find six imperfect monstrosities carefully buried upright in nine foot snow graves under five pointed mounds punched over with groups of dots in patterns exactly like those on the queer greenish soapstones dug up from Mesozoic or Tertiary times.
The eight perfect specimens mentioned by Lake seemed to have been completely blown away.
We were careful, too, about the public's general peace of mind hence Danforth and I said little about that frightful trip over the mountains the next day.
It was the fact that only a radically lightened plane could possibly cross a range of such height which mercifully limited that scouting tour to the two of us.
On our return at one a.m., Danforth was close to hysterics, but kept an admirably stiff upper lip.
It took no persuasion to make him promise not to show our sketches and the other things we brought away in our pockets, not to say anything more to the others than what we had agreed to relay outside, and to hide our camera films for private development later on so that part of my present story will be as new to Pabodie, McTighe, Ropes, Sherman, and the rest as it will be to that world in general.
Indeed Danforth is closer mouthed than I for he saw, or thinks he saw, one thing he will not tell even me.
As all know, our report included a tale of a hard ascent a confirmation of Lake's opinion that the great peaks are of archaean slate and other very primal crumpled strata unchanged since at least middle Comanchean time, a conventional comment on the regularity of the clinging cube and rampart formations, a decision that the cave mouths indicate dissolved calcareous veins, a conjecture that certain slopes and passes would permit of the scaling and crossing of the entire range by seasoned mountaineers, and a remark that the mysterious other side holds a lofty and immense superplateau as ancient and unchanging as the mountains themselves twenty thousand feet in elevation, with grotesque rock formations protruding through a thin glacial layer and with low gradual foothills between the general plateau surface and the sheer precipices of the highest peaks.
This body of data is in every respect true so far as it goes, and it completely satisfied the men at the camp.
We laid our absence of sixteen hours a longer time than our announced flying, landing, reconnoitering, and rock collecting program called for to a long mythical spell of adverse wind conditions, and told truly of our landing on the farther foothills.
Fortunately our tale sounded realistic and prosaic enough not to tempt any of the others into emulating our flight.
Had any tried to do that, I would have used every ounce of my persuasion to stop them and I do not know what Danforth would have done.
While we were gone, Pabodie, Sherman, Ropes, McTighe, and Williamson had worked like beavers over Lake's two best planes, fitting them again for use, despite the altogether unaccountable juggling of their operative mechanism.
We decided to load all the planes the next morning and start back for our old base as soon as possible.
Even though indirect, that was the safest way to work toward McMurdo Sound for a straight line flight across the most utterly unknown stretches of the aeon dead continent would involve many additional hazards.
Further exploration was hardly feasible in view of our tragic decimation and the ruin of our drilling machinery.
The doubts and horrors around us which we did not reveal made us wish only to escape from this austral world of desolation and brooding madness as swiftly as we could.
As the public knows, our return to the world was accomplished without further disasters.
All planes reached the old base on the evening of the next day January 27th after a swift nonstop flight and on the 28th we made McMurdo Sound in two laps, the one pause being very brief, and occasioned by a faulty rudder, in the furious wind over the ice shelf after we had cleared the great plateau.
In five days more, the Arkham and Miskatonic, with all hands and equipment on board, were shaking clear of the thickening field ice and working up Ross Sea, with the mocking mountains of Victoria Land looming westward against a troubled antarctic sky and twisting the wind's wails into a wide ranged musical piping which chilled my soul to the quick.
Less than a fortnight later we left the last hint of polar land behind us and thanked heaven that we were clear of a haunted, accursed realm where life and death, space and time, have made black and blasphemous alliances in the unknown epochs since matter first writhed and swam on the planet's scarce cooled crust.
Since our return we have all constantly worked to discourage antarctic exploration, and have kept certain doubts and guesses to ourselves with splendid unity and faithfulness.
Even young Danforth, with his nervous breakdown, has not flinched or babbled to his doctors.
Indeed, as I have said, there is one thing he thinks he alone saw which he will not tell even me, though I think it would help his psychological state if he would consent to do so.
It might explain and relieve much, though perhaps the thing was no more than the delusive aftermath of an earlier shock.
That is the impression I gather after those rare, irresponsible moments when he whispers disjointed things to me things which he repudiates vehemently as soon as he gets a grip on himself again.
It will be hard work deterring others from the great white south, and some of our efforts may directly harm our cause by drawing inquiring notice.
We might have known from the first that human curiosity is undying, and that the results we announced would be enough to spur others ahead on the same age long pursuit of the unknown.
Lake's reports of those biological monstrosities had aroused naturalists and palaeontologists to the highest pitch, though we were sensible enough not to show the detached parts we had taken from the actual buried specimens, or our photographs of those specimens as they were found.
We also refrained from showing the more puzzling of the scarred bones and greenish soapstones while Danforth and I have closely guarded the pictures we took or drew on the superplateau across the range, and the crumpled things we smoothed, studied in terror, and brought away in our pockets.
But now that Starkweather Moore party is organizing, and with a thoroughness far beyond anything our outfit attempted if not dissuaded, they will get to the innermost nucleus of the antarctic and melt and bore till they bring up that which we know may end the world.
So I must break through all reticences at last even about that ultimate, nameless thing beyond the mountains of madness.
It is only with vast hesitancy and repugnance that I let my mind go back to Lake's camp and what we really found there and to that other thing beyond the awful mountain wall.
I have told of the wind ravaged terrain, the damaged shelters, the disarranged machinery, the varied uneasiness of our dogs, the missing sledges and other items, the deaths of men and dogs, the absence of Gedney, and the six insanely buried biological specimens, strangely sound in texture for all their structural injuries, from a world forty million years dead.
I do not recall whether I mentioned that upon checking up the canine bodies we found one dog missing.
We did not think much about that till later indeed, only Danforth and I have thought of it at all.
The principal things I have been keeping back relate to the bodies, and to certain subtle points which may or may not lend a hideous and incredible kind of rationale to the apparent chaos.
At the time, I tried to keep the men's minds off those points for it was so much simpler so much more normal to lay everything to an outbreak of madness on the part of some of Lake's party.
From the look of things, that demon mountain wind must have been enough to drive any man mad in the midst of this center of all earthly mystery and desolation.
The crowning abnormality, of course, was the condition of the bodies men and dogs alike.
They had all been in some terrible kind of conflict, and were torn and mangled in fiendish and altogether inexplicable ways.
Death, so far as we could judge, had in each case come from strangulation or laceration.
The dogs had evidently started the trouble, for the state of their ill built corral bore witness to its forcible breakage from within.
It had been set some distance from the camp because of the hatred of the animals for those hellish archaean organisms, but the precaution seemed to have been taken in vain.
When left alone in that monstrous wind, behind flimsy walls of insufficient height, they must have stampeded whether from the wind itself, or from some subtle, increasing odor emitted by the nightmare specimens, one could not say.
But whatever had happened, it was hideous and revolting enough.
Perhaps I had better put squeamishness aside and tell the worst at last though with a categorical statement of opinion, based on the first hand observations and most rigid deductions of both Danforth and myself, that the then missing Gedney was in no way responsible for the loathsome horrors we found.
I have said that the bodies were frightfully mangled.
Now I must add that some were incised and subtracted from in the most curious, cold blooded, and inhuman fashion.
It was the same with dogs and men.
All the healthier, fatter bodies, quadrupedal or bipedal, had had their most solid masses of tissue cut out and removed, as by a careful butcher and around them was a strange sprinkling of salt taken from the ravaged provision chests on the planes which conjured up the most horrible associations.
The thing had occurred in one of the crude aeroplane shelters from which the plane had been dragged out, and subsequent winds had effaced all tracks which could have supplied any plausible theory.
Scattered bits of clothing, roughly slashed from the human incision subjects, hinted no clues.
It is useless to bring up the half impression of certain faint snow prints in one shielded corner of the ruined inclosure because that impression did not concern human prints at all, but was clearly mixed up with all the talk of fossil prints which poor Lake had been giving throughout the preceding weeks.
One had to be careful of one's imagination in the lee of those overshadowing mountains of madness.
As I have indicated, Gedney and one dog turned out to be missing in the end.
When we came on that terrible shelter we had missed two dogs and two men but the fairly unharmed dissecting tent, which we entered after investigating the monstrous graves, had something to reveal.
It was not as Lake had left it, for the covered parts of the primal monstrosity had been removed from the improvised table.
Indeed, we had already realized that one of the six imperfect and insanely buried things we had found the one with the trace of a peculiarly hateful odor must represent the collected sections of the entity which Lake had tried to analyze.
On and around that laboratory table were strewn other things, and it did not take long for us to guess that those things were the carefully, though oddly and inexpertly dissected parts of one man and one dog.
I shall spare the feelings of survivors by omitting mention of the man's identity.
Lake's anatomical instruments were missing, but there were evidences of their careful cleansing.
The gasoline stove was also gone, though around it we found a curious litter of matches.
We buried the human parts beside the other ten men, and the canine parts with the other thirty five dogs.
Concerning the bizarre smudges on the laboratory table, and on the jumble of roughly handled illustrated books scattered near it, we were much too bewildered to speculate.
This formed the worst of the camp horror, but other things were equally perplexing.
The disappearance of Gedney, the one dog, the eight uninjured biological specimens, the three sledges, and certain instruments, illustrated technical and scientific books, writing materials, electric torches and batteries, food and fuel, heating apparatus, spare tents, fur suits, and the like, was utterly beyond sane conjecture as were likewise the spatter fringed ink blots on certain pieces of paper, and the evidences of curious alien fumbling and experimentation around the planes and all other mechanical devices both at the camp and at the boring.
The dogs seemed to abhor this oddly disordered machinery.
Then, too, there was the upsetting of the larder, the disappearance of certain staples, and the jarringly comical heap of tin cans pried open in the most unlikely ways and at the most unlikely places.
The profusion of scattered matches, intact, broken, or spent, formed another minor enigma as did the two or three tent cloths and fur suits which we found lying about with peculiar and unorthodox slashings conceivably due to clumsy efforts at unimaginable adaptations.
The maltreatment of the human and canine bodies, and the crazy burial of the damaged archaean specimens, were all of a piece with this apparent disintegrative madness.
In view of just such an eventuality as the present one, we carefully photographed all the main evidences of insane disorder at the camp and shall use the prints to buttress our pleas against the departure of the proposed Starkweather Moore Expedition.
Our first act after finding the bodies in the shelter was to photograph and open the row of insane graves with the five pointed snow mounds.
We could not help noticing the resemblance of these monstrous mounds, with their clusters of grouped dots, to poor Lake's descriptions of the strange greenish soapstones and when we came on some of the soapstones themselves in the great mineral pile we found the likeness very close indeed.
The whole general formation, it must be made clear, seemed abominably suggestive of the starfish head of the archaean entities and we agreed that the suggestion must have worked potently upon the sensitized minds of Lake's overwrought party.
For madness centering in Gedney as the only possible surviving agent was the explanation spontaneously adopted by everybody so far as spoken utterance was concerned though I will not be so naive as to deny that each of us may have harbored wild guesses which sanity forbade him to formulate completely.
Sherman, Pabodie, and McTighe made an exhaustive aeroplane cruise over all the surrounding territory in the afternoon, sweeping the horizon with field glasses in quest of Gedney and of the various missing things but nothing came to light.
The party reported that the titan barrier range extended endlessly to right and left alike, without any diminution in height or essential structure.
On some of the peaks, though, the regular cube and rampart formations were bolder and plainer, having doubly fantastic similitudes to Roerich painted Asian hill ruins.
The distribution of cryptical cave mouths on the black snow denuded summits seemed roughly even as far as the range could be traced.
In spite of all the prevailing horrors we were left with enough sheer scientific zeal and adventurousness to wonder about the unknown realm beyond those mysterious mountains.
As our guarded messages stated, we rested at midnight after our day of terror and bafflement but not without a tentative plan for one or more range crossing altitude flights in a lightened plane with aerial camera and geologist's outfit, beginning the following morning.
It was decided that Danforth and I try it first, and we awaked at seven a.m. intending an early trip though heavy winds mentioned in our brief bulletin to the outside world delayed our start till nearly nine o'clock.
I have already repeated the noncommittal story we told the men at camp and relayed outside after our return sixteen hours later.
It is now my terrible duty to amplify this account by filling in the merciful blanks with hints of what we really saw in that hidden transmontane world hints of the revelations which have finally driven Danforth to a nervous collapse.
I wish he would add a really frank word about the thing which he thinks he alone saw even though it was probably a nervous delusion and which was perhaps the last straw that put him where he is but he is firm against that.
All I can do is to repeat his later disjointed whispers about what set him shrieking as the plane soared back through the wind tortured mountain pass after that real and tangible shock which I shared.
This will form my last word.
If the plain signs of surviving elder horrors in what I disclose be not enough to keep others from meddling with the inner antarctic or at least from prying too deeply beneath the surface of that ultimate waste of forbidden secrets and unhuman, aeon cursed desolation the responsibility for unnamable and perhaps immeasurable evils will not be mine.
Danforth and I, studying the notes made by Pabodie in his afternoon flight and checking up with a sextant, had calculated that the lowest available pass in the range lay somewhat to the right of us, within sight of camp, and about twenty three thousand or twenty four thousand feet above sea level.
For this point, then, we first headed in the lightened plane as we embarked on our flight of discovery.
The camp itself, on foothills which sprang from a high continental plateau, was some twelve thousand feet in altitude hence the actual height increase necessary was not so vast as it might seem.
Nevertheless we were acutely conscious of the rarefied air and intense cold as we rose for, on account of visibility conditions, we had to leave the cabin windows open.
We were dressed, of course, in our heaviest furs.
As we drew near the forbidding peaks, dark and sinister above the line of crevasse riven snow and interstitial glaciers, we noticed more and more the curiously regular formations clinging to the slopes and thought again of the strange Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich.
The ancient and wind weathered rock strata fully verified all of Lake's bulletins, and proved that these pinnacles had been towering up in exactly the same way since a surprisingly early time in earth's history perhaps over fifty million years.
How much higher they had once been, it was futile to guess but everything about this strange region pointed to obscure atmospheric influences unfavorable to change, and calculated to retard the usual climatic processes of rock disintegration.
But it was the mountainside tangle of regular cubes, ramparts, and cave mouths which fascinated and disturbed us most.
I studied them with a field glass and took aerial photographs while Danforth drove and at times I relieved him at the controls though my aviation knowledge was purely an amateur's in order to let him use the binoculars.
We could easily see that much of the material of the things was a lightish archaean quartzite, unlike any formation visible over broad areas of the general surface and that their regularity was extreme and uncanny to an extent which poor Lake had scarcely hinted.
As he had said, their edges were crumbled and rounded from untold aeons of savage weathering but their preternatural solidity and tough material had saved them from obliteration.
Many parts, especially those closest to the slopes, seemed identical in substance with the surrounding rock surface.
The whole arrangement looked like the ruins of Macchu Picchu in the Andes, or the primal foundation walls of Kish as dug up by the Oxford Field Museum Expedition in 1929 and both Danforth and I obtained that occasional impression of separate Cyclopean blocks which Lake had attributed to his flight companion Carroll.
How to account for such things in this place was frankly beyond me, and I felt queerly humbled as a geologist.
Igneous formations often have strange regularities like the famous Giants' Causeway in Ireland but this stupendous range, despite Lake's original suspicion of smoking cones, was above all else nonvolcanic in evident structure.
The curious cave mouths, near which the odd formation seemed most abundant, presented another, albeit a lesser puzzle because of their regularity of outline.
They were, as Lake's bulletin had said, often approximately square or semicircular as if the natural orifices had been shaped to greater symmetry by some magic hand.
Their numerousness and wide distribution were remarkable, and suggested that the whole region was honeycombed with tunnels dissolved out of limestone strata.
Such glimpses as we secured did not extend far within the caverns, but we saw that they were apparently clear of stalactites and stalagmites.
Outside, those parts of the mountain slopes adjoining the apertures seemed invariably smooth and regular and Danforth thought that the slight cracks and pittings of the weathering tended toward unusual patterns.
Filled as he was with the horrors and strangenesses discovered at the camp, he hinted that the pittings vaguely resembled those baffling groups of dots sprinkled over the primeval greenish soapstones, so hideously duplicated on the madly conceived snow mounds above those six buried monstrosities.
We had risen gradually in flying over the higher foothills and along toward the relatively low pass we had selected.
As we advanced we occasionally looked down at the snow and ice of the land route, wondering whether we could have attempted the trip with the simpler equipment of earlier days.
Somewhat to our surprise we saw that the terrain was far from difficult as such things go and that despite the crevasses and other bad spots it would not have been likely to deter the sledges of a Scott, a Shackleton, or an Amundsen.
Some of the glaciers appeared to lead up to wind bared passes with unusual continuity, and upon reaching our chosen pass we found that its case formed no exception.
Our sensations of tense expectancy as we prepared to round the crest and peer out over an untrodden world can hardly be described on paper even though we had no cause to think the regions beyond the range essentially different from those already seen and traversed.
The touch of evil mystery in these barrier mountains, and in the beckoning sea of opalescent sky glimpsed betwixt their summits, was a highly subtle and attenuated matter not to be explained in literal words.
Rather was it an affair of vague psychological symbolism and aesthetic association a thing mixed up with exotic poetry and paintings, and with archaic myths lurking in shunned and forbidden volumes.
Even the wind's burden held a peculiar strain of conscious malignity and for a second it seemed that the composite sound included a bizarre musical whistling, or piping over a wide range as the blast swept in and out of the omnipresent and resonant cave mouths.
There was a cloudy note of reminiscent repulsion in this sound, as complex and unplaceable as any of the other dark impressions.
We were now, after a slow ascent, at a height of twenty three thousand five hundred and seventy feet according to the aneroid and had left the region of clinging snow definitely below us.
Up here were only dark, bare rock slopes and the start of rough ribbed glaciers but with those provocative cubes, ramparts, and echoing cave mouths to add a portent of the unnatural, the fantastic, and the dreamlike.
Looking along the line of high peaks, I thought I could see the one mentioned by poor Lake, with a rampart exactly on top.
It seemed to be half lost in a queer antarctic haze such a haze, perhaps, as had been responsible for Lake's early notion of volcanism.
The pass loomed directly before us, smooth and windswept between its jagged and malignly frowning pylons.
Beyond it was a sky fretted with swirling vapors and lighted by the low polar sun the sky of that mysterious farther realm upon which we felt no human eye had ever gazed.
A few more feet of altitude and we would behold that realm.
Danforth and I, unable to speak except in shouts amidst the howling, piping wind that raced through the pass and added to the noise of the unmuffled engines, exchanged eloquent glances.
And then, having gained those last few feet, we did indeed stare across the momentous divide and over the unsampled secrets of an elder and utterly alien earth.
I think that both of us simultaneously cried out in mixed awe, wonder, terror, and disbelief in our own senses as we finally cleared the pass and saw what lay beyond.
Of course, we must have had some natural theory in the back of our heads to steady our faculties for the moment.
Probably we thought of such things as the grotesquely weathered stones of the Garden of the Gods in Colorado, or the fantastically symmetrical wind carved rocks of the Arizona desert.
Perhaps we even half thought the sight a mirage like that we had seen the morning before on first approaching those mountains of madness.
We must have had some such normal notions to fall back upon as our eyes swept that limitless, tempest scarred plateau and grasped the almost endless labyrinth of colossal, regular, and geometrically eurythmic stone masses which reared their crumbled and pitted crests above a glacial sheet not more than forty or fifty feet deep at its thickest, and in places obviously thinner.
The effect of the monstrous sight was indescribable, for some fiendish violation of known natural law seemed certain at the outset.
Here, on a hellishly ancient table land fully twenty thousand feet high, and in a climate deadly to habitation since a prehuman age not less than five hundred thousand years ago, there stretched nearly to the vision's limit a tangle of orderly stone which only the desperation of mental self defense could possibly attribute to any but a conscious and artificial cause.
We had previously dismissed, so far as serious thought was concerned, any theory that the cubes and ramparts of the mountainsides were other than natural in origin.
How could they be otherwise, when man himself could scarcely have been differentiated from the great apes at the time when this region succumbed to the present unbroken reign of glacial death?
Yet now the sway of reason seemed irrefutably shaken, for this Cyclopean maze of squared, curved, and angled blocks had features which cut off all comfortable refuge.
It was, very clearly, the blasphemous city of the mirage in stark, objective, and ineluctable reality.
That damnable portent had had a material basis after all there had been some horizontal stratum of ice dust in the upper air, and this shocking stone survival had projected its image across the mountains according to the simple laws of reflection.
Of course, the phantom had been twisted and exaggerated, and had contained things which the real source did not contain yet now, as we saw that real source, we thought it even more hideous and menacing than its distant image.
Only the incredible, unhuman massiveness of these vast stone towers and ramparts had saved the frightful thing from utter annihilation in the hundreds of thousands perhaps millions of years it had brooded there amidst the blasts of a bleak upland.
''Corona Mundi Roof of the World  '' All sorts of fantastic phrases sprang to our lips as we looked dizzily down at the unbelievable spectacle.
I thought again of the eldritch primal myths that had so persistently haunted me since my first sight of this dead antarctic world of the demonic plateau of Leng, of the Mi Go, or Abominable Snow Men of the Himalayas, of the Pnakotic Manuscripts with their prehuman implications, of the Cthulhu cult, of the Necronomicon, and of the Hyperborean legends of formless Tsathoggua and the worse than formless star spawn associated with that semientity.
For boundless miles in every direction the thing stretched off with very little thinning indeed, as our eyes followed it to the right and left along the base of the low, gradual foothills which separated it from the actual mountain rim, we decided that we could see no thinning at all except for an interruption at the left of the pass through which we had come.
We had merely struck, at random, a limited part of something of incalculable extent.
The foothills were more sparsely sprinkled with grotesque stone structures, linking the terrible city to the already familiar cubes and ramparts which evidently formed its mountain outposts.
These latter, as well as the queer cave mouths, were as thick on the inner as on the outer sides of the mountains.
The nameless stone labyrinth consisted, for the most part, of walls from ten to one hundred and fifty feet in ice clear height, and of a thickness varying from five to ten feet.
It was composed mostly of prodigious blocks of dark primordial slate, schist, and sandstone blocks in many cases as large as 4 x 6 x 8 feet though in several places it seemed to be carved out of a solid, uneven bed rock of pre Cambrian slate.
The buildings were far from equal in size, there being innumerable honeycomb arrangements of enormous extent as well as smaller separate structures.
The general shape of these things tended to be conical, pyramidal, or terraced though there were many perfect cylinders, perfect cubes, clusters of cubes, and other rectangular forms, and a peculiar sprinkling of angled edifices whose five pointed ground plan roughly suggested modern fortifications.
The builders had made constant and expert use of the principle of the arch, and domes had probably existed in the city's heyday.
The whole tangle was monstrously weathered, and the glacial surface from where the towers projected was strewn with fallen blocks and immemorial debris.
Where the glaciation was transparent we could see the lower parts of the gigantic piles, and we noticed the ice preserved stone bridges which connected the different towers at varying distances above the ground.
On the exposed walls we could detect the scarred places where other and higher bridges of the same sort had existed.
Closer inspection revealed countless largish windows some of which were closed with shutters of a petrified material originally wood, though most gaped open in a sinister and menacing fashion.
Many of the ruins, of course, were roofless, and with uneven though wind rounded upper edges whilst others, of a more sharply conical or pyramidal model or else protected by higher surrounding structures, preserved intact outlines despite the omnipresent crumbling and pitting.
With the field glass we could barely make out what seemed to be sculptural decorations in horizontal bands decorations including those curious groups of dots whose presence on the ancient soapstones now assumed a vastly larger significance.
In many places the buildings were totally ruined and the ice sheet deeply riven from various geologic causes.
In other places the stonework was worn down to the very level of the glaciation.
One broad swath, extending from the plateau's interior to a cleft in the foothills about a mile to the left of the pass we had traversed, was wholly free from buildings.
It probably represented, we concluded, the course of some great river which in Tertiary times millions of years ago had poured through the city and into some prodigious subterranean abyss of the great barrier range.
Certainly, this was above all a region of caves, gulfs, and underground secrets beyond human penetration.
Looking back to our sensations, and recalling our dazedness at viewing this monstrous survival from aeons we had thought prehuman, I can only wonder that we preserved the semblance of equilibrium which we did.
Of course, we knew that something chronology, scientific theory, or our own consciousness was woefully awry yet we kept enough poise to guide the plane, observe many things quite minutely, and take a careful series of photographs which may yet serve both us and the world in good stead.
In my case, ingrained scientific habit may have helped for above all my bewilderment and sense of menace there burned a dominant curiosity to fathom more of this age old secret to know what sort of beings had built and lived in this incalculably gigantic place, and what relation to the general world of its time or of other times so unique a concentration of life could have had.
For this place could be no ordinary city.
It must have formed the primary nucleus and center of some archaic and unbelievable chapter of earth's history whose outward ramifications, recalled only dimly in the most obscure and distorted myths, had vanished utterly amidst the chaos of terrene convulsions long before any human race we know had shambled out of apedom.
Here sprawled a Palaeogaean megalopolis compared with which the fabled Atlantis and Lemuria, Commoriom and Uzuldaroum, and Olathoe in the land of Lomar are recent things of to day not even of yesterday a megalopolis ranking with such whispered prehuman blasphemies as Valusia, R'lyeh, Ib in the land of Mnar, and the Nameless City of Arabia Deserta.
As we flew above that tangle of stark Titan towers my imagination sometimes escaped all bounds and roved aimlessly in realms of fantastic associations even weaving links betwixt this lost world and some of my own wildest dreams concerning the mad horror at the camp.
The plane's fuel tank, in the interest of greater lightness, had been only partly filled hence we now had to exert caution in our explorations.
Even so, however, we covered an enormous extent of ground or rather, air after swooping down to a level where the wind became virtually negligible.
There seemed to be no limit to the mountain range, or to the length of the frightful stone city which bordered its inner foothills.
Fifty miles of flight in each direction showed no major change in the labyrinth of rock and masonry that clawed up corpselike through the eternal ice.
There were, though, some highly absorbing diversifications such as the carvings on the canyon where that broad river had once pierced the foothills and approached its sinking place in the great range.
The headlands at the stream's entrance had been boldly carved into Cyclopean pylons and something about the ridgy, barrel shaped designs stirred up oddly vague, hateful, and confusing semiremembrances in both Danforth and me.
We also came upon several star shaped open spaces, evidently public squares, and noted various undulations in the terrain.
Where a sharp hill rose, it was generally hollowed out into some sort of rambling stone edifice but there were at least two exceptions.
Of these latter, one was too badly weathered to disclose what had been on the jutting eminence, while the other still bore a fantastic conical monument carved out of the solid rock and roughly resembling such things as the well known Snake Tomb in the ancient valley of Petra.
Flying inland from the mountains, we discovered that the city was not of infinite width, even though its length along the foothills seemed endless.
After about thirty miles the grotesque stone buildings began to thin out, and in ten more miles we came to an unbroken waste virtually without signs of sentient artifice.
The course of the river beyond the city seemed marked by a broad, depressed line, while the land assumed a somewhat greater ruggedness, seeming to slope slightly upward as it receded in the mist hazed west.
So far we had made no landing, yet to leave the plateau without an attempt at entering some of the monstrous structures would have been inconceivable.
Accordingly, we decided to find a smooth place on the foothills near our navigable pass, there grounding the plane and preparing to do some exploration on foot.
Though these gradual slopes were partly covered with a scattering of ruins, low flying soon disclosed an ample number of possible landing places.
Selecting that nearest to the pass, since our next flight would be across the great range and back to camp, we succeeded about twelve thirty p.m. in coming down on a smooth, hard snow field wholly devoid of obstacles and well adapted to a swift and favorable take off later on.
It did not seem necessary to protect the plane with a snow banking for so brief a time and in so comfortable an absence of high winds at this level hence we merely saw that the landing skis were safely lodged, and that the vital parts of the mechanism were guarded against the cold.
For our foot journey we discarded the heaviest of our flying furs, and took with us a small outfit consisting of pocket compass, hand camera, light provisions, voluminous notebooks and paper, geologist's hammer and chisel, specimen bags, coil of climbing rope, and powerful electric torches with extra batteries this equipment having been carried in the plane on the chance that we might be able to effect a landing, take ground pictures, make drawings and topographical sketches, and obtain rock specimens from some bare slope, outcropping, or mountain cave.
Fortunately, we had a supply of extra paper to tear up, place in a spare specimen bag, and use on the ancient principle of hare and hounds for marking our course in any interior mazes we might be able to penetrate.
This had been brought in case we found some cave system with air quiet enough to allow such a rapid and easy method in place of the usual rock chipping method of trail blazing.
Walking cautiously downhill over the crusted snow, toward the stupendous stone labyrinth that loomed against the opalescent west, we felt almost as keen a sense of imminent marvels as we had felt on approaching the unfathomed mountain pass four hours previously.
True, we had become visually familiar with the incredible secret concealed by the barrier peaks yet the prospect of actually entering primordial walls reared by conscious beings perhaps millions of years ago before any known race of men could have existed was none the less awesome and potentially terrible in its implications of cosmic abnormality.
Though the thinness of the air at this prodigious altitude made exertion somewhat more difficult than usual, both Danforth and I found ourselves bearing up very well, and felt equal to almost any task which might fall to our lot.
It took only a few steps to bring us to a shapeless ruin worn level with the snow, while ten or fifteen rods farther on there was a huge, roofless rampart still complete in its gigantic five pointed outline, and rising to an irregular height of ten or eleven feet.
For this latter we headed and when at last we were actually able to touch its weathered Cyclopean blocks, we felt that we had established an unprecedented and almost blasphemous link with forgotten aeons normally closed to our species.
This rampart, shaped like a star and perhaps three hundred feet from point to point, was built of Jurassic sandstone blocks of irregular size, averaging 6 x 8 feet in surface.
There was a row of arched loopholes or windows about four feet wide and five feet high, spaced quite symmetrically along the points of the star and at its inner angles, and with the bottoms about four feet from the glaciated surface.
Looking through these, we could see that the masonry was fully five feet thick, that there were no partitions remaining within, and that there were traces of banded carvings or bas reliefs on the interior walls facts we had indeed guessed before, when flying low over this rampart and others like it.
Though lower parts must have originally existed, all traces of such things were now wholly obscured by the deep layer of ice and snow at this point.
We crawled through one of the windows and vainly tried to decipher the nearly effaced mural designs, but did not attempt to disturb the glaciated floor.
Our orientation flights had indicated that many buildings in the city proper were less ice choked, and that we might perhaps find wholly clear interiors leading down to the true ground level if we entered those structures still roofed at the top.
Before we left the rampart we photographed it carefully, and studied its mortarless Cyclopean masonry with complete bewilderment.
We wished that Pabodie were present, for his engineering knowledge might have helped us guess how such titanic blocks could have been handled in that unbelievably remote age when the city and its outskirts were built up.
The half mile walk downhill to the actual city, with the upper wind shrieking vainly and savagely through the skyward peaks in the background, was something of which the smallest details will always remain engraved on my mind.
Only in fantastic nightmares could any human beings but Danforth and me conceive such optical effects.
Between us and the churning vapors of the west lay that monstrous tangle of dark stone towers, its outre and incredible forms impressing us afresh at every new angle of vision.
It was a mirage in solid stone, and were it not for the photographs I would still doubt that such a thing could be.
The general type of masonry was identical with that of the rampart we had examined but the extravagant shapes which this masonry took in its urban manifestations were past all description.
Even the pictures illustrate only one or two phases of its endless variety, preternatural massiveness, and utterly alien exoticism.
There were geometrical forms for which an Euclid could scarcely find a name cones of all degrees of irregularity and truncation, terraces of every sort of provocative disproportion, shafts with odd bulbous enlargements, broken columns in curious groups, and five pointed or five ridged arrangements of mad grotesqueness.
As we drew nearer we could see beneath certain transparent parts of the ice sheet, and detect some of the tubular stone bridges that connected the crazily sprinkled structures at various heights.
Of orderly streets there seemed to be none, the only broad open swath being a mile to the left, where the ancient river had doubtless flowed through the town into the mountains.
Our field glasses showed the external, horizontal bands of nearly effaced sculptures and dot groups to be very prevalent, and we could half imagine what the city must once have looked like even though most of the roofs and tower tops had necessarily perished.
As a whole, it had been a complex tangle of twisted lanes and alleys, all of them deep canyons, and some little better than tunnels because of the overhanging masonry or overarching bridges.
Now, outspread below us, it loomed like a dream phantasy against a westward mist through whose northern end the low, reddish antarctic sun of early afternoon was struggling to shine and when, for a moment, that sun encountered a denser obstruction and plunged the scene into temporary shadow, the effect was subtly menacing in a way I can never hope to depict.
Even the faint howling and piping of the unfelt wind in the great mountain passes behind us took on a wilder note of purposeful malignity.
The last stage of our descent to the town was unusually steep and abrupt, and a rock outcropping at the edge where the grade changed led us to think that an artificial terrace had once existed there.
Under the glaciation, we believed, there must be a flight of steps or its equivalent.
When at last we plunged into the town itself, clambering over fallen masonry and shrinking from the oppressive nearness and dwarfing height of omnipresent crumbling and pitted walls, our sensations again became such that I marvel at the amount of self control we retained.
Danforth was frankly jumpy, and began making some offensively irrelevant speculations about the horror at the camp which I resented all the more because I could not help sharing certain conclusions forced upon us by many features of this morbid survival from nightmare antiquity.
The speculations worked on his imagination, too for in one place where a debris littered alley turned a sharp corner he insisted that he saw faint traces of ground markings which he did not like whilst elsewhere he stopped to listen to a subtle, imaginary sound from some undefined point a muffled musical piping, he said, not unlike that of the wind in the mountain caves, yet somehow disturbingly different.
The ceaseless five pointedness of the surrounding architecture and of the few distinguishable mural arabesques had a dimly sinister suggestiveness we could not escape, and gave us a touch of terrible subconscious certainty concerning the primal entities which had reared and dwelt in this unhallowed place.
Nevertheless, our scientific and adventurous souls were not wholly dead, and we mechanically carried out our program of chipping specimens from all the different rock types represented in the masonry.
We wished a rather full set in order to draw better conclusions regarding the age of the place.
Nothing in the great outer walls seemed to date from later than the Jurassic and Comanchean periods, nor was any piece of stone in the entire place of a greater recency than the Pliocene age.
In stark certainty, we were wandering amidst a death which had reigned at least five hundred thousand years, and in all probability even longer.
As we proceeded through this maze of stone shadowed twilight we stopped at all available apertures to study interiors and investigate entrance possibilities.
Some were above our reach, whilst others led only into ice choked ruins as unroofed and barren as the rampart on the hill.
One, though spacious and inviting, opened on a seemingly bottomless abyss without visible means of descent.
Now and then we had a chance to study the petrified wood of a surviving shutter, and were impressed by the fabulous antiquity implied in the still discernible grain.
These things had come from Mesozoic gymnosperms and conifers especially Cretaceous cycads and from fan palms and early angiosperms of plainly Tertiary date.
Nothing definitely later than the Pliocene could be discovered.
In the placing of these shutters whose edges showed the former presence of queer and long vanished hinges usage seemed to be varied some being on the outer and some on the inner side of the deep embrasures.
They seemed to have become wedged in place, thus surviving the rusting of their former and probably metallic fixtures and fastenings.
After a time we came across a row of windows in the bulges of a colossal five edged cone of undamaged apex which led into a vast, well preserved room with stone flooring but these were too high in the room to permit descent without a rope.
We had a rope with us, but did not wish to bother with this twenty foot drop unless obliged to especially in this thin plateau air where great demands were made upon the heart action.
This enormous room was probably a hall or concourse of some sort, and our electric torches showed bold, distinct, and potentially startling sculptures arranged round the walls in broad, horizontal bands separated by equally broad strips of conventional arabesques.
We took careful note of this spot, planning to enter here unless a more easily gained interior was encountered.
Finally, though, we did encounter exactly the opening we wished an archway about six feet wide and ten feet high, marking the former end of an aerial bridge which had spanned an alley about five feet above the present level of glaciation.
These archways, of course, were flush with upper story floors, and in this case one of the floors still existed.
The building thus accessible was a series of rectangular terraces on our left facing westward.
That across the alley, where the other archway yawned, was a decrepit cylinder with no windows and with a curious bulge about ten feet above the aperture.
It was totally dark inside, and the archway seemed to open on a well of illimitable emptiness.
Heaped debris made the entrance to the vast left hand building doubly easy, yet for a moment we hesitated before taking advantage of the long wished chance.
For though we had penetrated into this tangle of archaic mystery, it required fresh resolution to carry us actually inside a complete and surviving building of a fabulous elder world whose nature was becoming more and more hideously plain to us.
In the end, however, we made the plunge, and scrambled up over the rubble into the gaping embrasure.
The floor beyond was of great slate slabs, and seemed to form the outlet of a long, high corridor with sculptured walls.
Observing the many inner archways which led off from it, and realizing the probable complexity of the nest of apartments within, we decided that we must begin our system of hare and hound trail blazing.
Hitherto our compasses, together with frequent glimpses of the vast mountain range between the towers in our rear, had been enough to prevent our losing our way but from now on, the artificial substitute would be necessary.
Accordingly we reduced our extra paper to shreds of suitable size, placed these in a bag to be carried by Danforth, and prepared to use them as economically as safety would allow.
This method would probably gain us immunity from straying, since there did not appear to be any strong air currents inside the primordial masonry.
If such should develop, or if our paper supply should give out, we could of course fall back on the more secure though more tedious and retarding method of rock chipping.
Just how extensive a territory we had opened up, it was impossible to guess without a trial.
The close and frequent connection of the different buildings made it likely that we might cross from one to another on bridges underneath the ice, except where impeded by local collapses and geologic rifts, for very little glaciation seemed to have entered the massive constructions.
Almost all the areas of transparent ice had revealed the submerged windows as tightly shuttered, as if the town had been left in that uniform state until the glacial sheet came to crystallize the lower part for all succeeding time.
Indeed, one gained a curious impression that this place had been deliberately closed and deserted in some dim, bygone aeon, rather than overwhelmed by any sudden calamity or even gradual decay.
Had the coming of the ice been foreseen, and had a nameless population left en masse to seek a less doomed abode?
The precise physiographic conditions attending the formation of the ice sheet at this point would have to wait for later solution.
It had not, very plainly, been a grinding drive.
Perhaps the pressure of accumulated snows had been responsible, and perhaps some flood from the river, or from the bursting of some ancient glacial dam in the great range, had helped to create the special state now observable.
Imagination could conceive almost anything in connection with this place.
It would be cumbrous to give a detailed, consecutive account of our wanderings inside that cavernous, aeon dead honeycomb of primal masonry that monstrous lair of elder secrets which now echoed for the first time, after uncounted epochs, to the tread of human feet.
This is especially true because so much of the horrible drama and revelation came from a mere study of the omnipresent mural carvings.
Our flash light photographs of those carvings will do much toward proving the truth of what we are now disclosing, and it is lamentable that we had not a larger film supply with us.
As it was, we made crude notebook sketches of certain salient features after all our films were used up.
The building which we had entered was one of great size and elaborateness, and gave us an impressive notion of the architecture of that nameless geologic past.
The inner partitions were less massive than the outer walls, but on the lower levels were excellently preserved.
Labyrinthine complexity, involving curiously irregular differences in floor levels, characterized the entire arrangement and we should certainly have been lost at the very outset but for the trail of torn paper left behind us.
We decided to explore the more decrepit upper parts first of all, hence climbed aloft in the maze for a distance of some one hundred feet, to where the topmost tier of chambers yawned snowily and ruinously open to the polar sky.
Ascent was effected over the steep, transversely ribbed stone ramps or inclined planes which everywhere served in lieu of stairs.
The rooms we encountered were of all imaginable shapes and proportions, ranging from five pointed stars to triangles and perfect cubes.
It might be safe to say that their general average was about 30 x 30 feet in floor area, and twenty feet in height, though many larger apartments existed.
After thoroughly examining the upper regions and the glacial level we descended, story by story, into the submerged part, where indeed we soon saw we were in a continuous maze of connected chambers and passages probably leading over unlimited areas outside this particular building.
The Cyclopean massiveness and giganticism of everything about us became curiously oppressive and there was something vaguely but deeply unhuman in all the contours, dimensions, proportions, decorations, and constructional nuances of the blasphemously archaic stonework.
We soon realized, from what the carvings revealed, that this monstrous city was many million years old.
We cannot yet explain the engineering principles used in the anomalous balancing and adjustment of the vast rock masses, though the function of the arch was clearly much relied on.
The rooms we visited were wholly bare of all portable contents, a circumstance which sustained our belief in the city's deliberate desertion.
The prime decorative feature was the almost universal system of mural sculpture, which tended to run in continuous horizontal bands three feet wide and arranged from floor to ceiling in alternation with bands of equal width given over to geometrical arabesques.
There were exceptions to this rule of arrangement, but its preponderance was overwhelming.
Often, however, a series of smooth cartouches containing oddly patterned groups of dots would be sunk along one of the arabesque bands.
The technique, we soon saw, was mature, accomplished, and aesthetically evolved to the highest degree of civilized mastery, though utterly alien in every detail to any known art tradition of the human race.
In delicacy of execution no sculpture I have ever seen could approach it.
The minutest details of elaborate vegetation, or of animal life, were rendered with astonishing vividness despite the bold scale of the carvings whilst the conventional designs were marvels of skillful intricacy.
The arabesques displayed a profound use of mathematical principles, and were made up of obscurely symmetrical curves and angles based on the quantity of five.
The pictorial bands followed a highly formalized tradition, and involved a peculiar treatment of perspective, but had an artistic force that moved us profoundly notwithstanding the intervening gulf of vast geologic periods.
Their method of design hinged on a singular juxtaposition of the cross section with the two dimensional silhouette, and embodied an analytical psychology beyond that of any known race of antiquity.
It is useless to try to compare this art with any represented in our museums.
Those who see our photographs will probably find its closest analogue in certain grotesque conceptions of the most daring futurists.
The arabesque tracery consisted altogether of depressed lines, whose depth on unweathered walls varied from one to two inches.
When cartouches with dot groups appeared evidently as inscriptions in some unknown and primordial language and alphabet the depression of the smooth surface was perhaps an inch and a half, and of the dots perhaps a half inch more.
The pictorial bands were in countersunk low relief, their background being depressed about two inches from the original wall surface.
In some specimens marks of a former coloration could be detected, though for the most part the untold aeons had disintegrated and banished any pigments which may have been applied.
The more one studied the marvelous technique the more one admired the things.
Beneath their strict conventionalization one could grasp the minute and accurate observation and graphic skill of the artists and indeed, the very conventions themselves served to symbolize and accentuate the real essence or vital differentiation of every object delineated.
We felt, too, that besides these recognizable excellences there were others lurking beyond the reach of our perceptions.
Certain touches here and there gave vague hints of latent symbols and stimuli which another mental and emotional background, and a fuller or different sensory equipment, might have made of profound and poignant significance to us.
The subject matter of the sculptures obviously came from the life of the vanished epoch of their creation, and contained a large proportion of evident history.
It is this abnormal historic mindedness of the primal race a chance circumstance operating, through coincidence, miraculously in our favor which made the carvings so awesomely informative to us, and which caused us to place their photography and transcription above all other considerations.
In certain rooms the dominant arrangement was varied by the presence of maps, astronomical charts, and other scientific designs on an enlarged scale these things giving a naive and terrible corroboration to what we gathered from the pictorial friezes and dados.
In hinting at what the whole revealed, I can only hope that my account will not arouse a curiosity greater than sane caution on the part of those who believe me at all.
It would be tragic if any were to be allured to that realm of death and horror by the very warning meant to discourage them.
Interrupting these sculptured walls were high windows and massive twelve foot doorways both now and then retaining the petrified wooden planks elaborately carved and polished of the actual shutters and doors.
All metal fixtures had long ago vanished, but some of the doors remained in place and had to be forced aside as we progressed from room to room.
Window frames with odd transparent panes mostly elliptical survived here and there, though in no considerable quantity.
There were also frequent niches of great magnitude, generally empty, but once in a while containing some bizarre object carved from green soapstone which was either broken or perhaps held too inferior to warrant removal.
Other apertures were undoubtedly connected with bygone mechanical facilities heating, lighting, and the like of a sort suggested in many of the carvings.
Ceilings tended to be plain, but had sometimes been inlaid with green soapstone or other tiles, mostly fallen now.
Floors were also paved with such tiles, though plain stonework predominated.
As I have said, all furniture and other movables were absent but the sculptures gave a clear idea of the strange devices which had once filled these tomblike, echoing rooms.
Above the glacial sheet the floors were generally thick with detritus, litter, and debris, but farther down this condition decreased.
In some of the lower chambers and corridors there was little more than gritty dust or ancient incrustations, while occasional areas had an uncanny air of newly swept immaculateness.
Of course, where rifts or collapses had occurred, the lower levels were as littered as the upper ones.
A central court as we had seen in other structures, from the air saved the inner regions from total darkness so that we seldom had to use our electric torches in the upper rooms except when studying sculptured details.
Below the ice cap, however, the twilight deepened and in many parts of the tangled ground level there was an approach to absolute blackness.
To form even a rudimentary idea of our thoughts and feelings as we penetrated this aeon silent maze of unhuman masonry one must correlate a hopelessly bewildering chaos of fugitive moods, memories, and impressions.
The sheer appalling antiquity and lethal desolation of the place were enough to overwhelm almost any sensitive person, but added to these elements were the recent unexplained horror at the camp, and the revelations all too soon effected by the terrible mural sculptures around us.
The moment we came upon a perfect section of carving, where no ambiguity of interpretation could exist, it took only a brief study to give us the hideous truth a truth which it would be naive to claim Danforth and I had not independently suspected before, though we had carefully refrained from even hinting it to each other.
There could now be no further merciful doubt about the nature of the beings which had built and inhabited this monstrous dead city millions of years ago, when man's ancestors were primitive archaic mammals, and vast Dinosauria roamed the tropical steppes of Europe and Asia.
We had previously clung to a desperate alternative and insisted each to himself that the omnipresence of the five pointed motif meant only some cultural or religious exaltation of the archaean natural object which had so patently embodied the quality of five pointedness as the decorative motifs of Minoan Crete exalted the sacred bull, those of Egypt the scarabaeus, those of Rome the wolf and the eagle, and those of various savage tribes some chosen totem animal.
But this lone refuge was now stripped from us, and we were forced to face definitely the reason shaking realization which the reader of these pages has doubtless long ago anticipated.
I can scarcely bear to write it down in black and white even now, but perhaps that will not be necessary.
The things once rearing and dwelling in this frightful masonry in the age of Dinosauria were not indeed Dinosauria, but far worse.
Mere Dinosauria were new and almost brainless objects but the builders of the city were wise and old, and had left certain traces in rocks even then laid down well nigh a thousand million years rocks laid down before the true life of earth had advanced beyond plastic groups of cells rocks laid down before the true life of earth had existed at all.
They were the makers and enslavers of that life, and above all doubt the originals of the fiendish elder myths which things like the Pnakotic Manuscripts and the Necronomicon affrightedly hint about.
They were the great ''Old Ones'' that had filtered down from the stars when earth was young the beings whose substance an alien evolution had shaped, and whose powers were such as this planet had never bred.
And to think that only the day before Danforth and I had actually looked upon fragments of their millennially fossilized substance and that poor Lake and his party had seen their complete outlines    It is, of course, impossible for me to relate in proper order the stages by which we picked up what we know of that monstrous chapter of prehuman life.
After the first shock of the certain revelation, we had to pause a while to recuperate, and it was fully three o'clock before we got started on our actual tour of systematic research.
The sculptures in the building we entered were of relatively late date perhaps two million years ago as checked up by geological, biological, and astronomical features and embodied an art which would be called decadent in comparison with that of specimens we found in older buildings, after crossing bridges under the glacial sheet.
One edifice hewn from the solid rock seemed to go back forty or possibly even fifty million years to the lower Eocene or upper Cretaceous and contained bas reliefs of an artistry surpassing anything else, with one tremendous exception, that we encountered.
That was, we have since agreed, the oldest domestic structure we traversed.
Were it not for the support of those flashlights soon to be made public, I would refrain from telling what I found and inferred, lest I be confined as a madman.
Of course, the infinitely early parts of the patchwork tale representing the preterrestrial life of the star headed beings on other planets, in other galaxies, and in other universes can readily be interpreted as the fantastic mythology of those beings themselves yet such parts sometimes involved designs and diagrams so uncannily close to the latest findings of mathematics and astrophysics that I scarcely know what to think.
Let others judge when they see the photographs I shall publish.
Naturally, no one set of carvings which we encountered told more than a fraction of any connected story, nor did we even begin to come upon the various stages of that story in their proper order.
Some of the vast rooms were independent units so far as their designs were concerned, whilst in other cases a continuous chronicle would be carried through a series of rooms and corridors.
The best of the maps and diagrams were on the walls of a frightful abyss below even the ancient ground level a cavern perhaps two hundred feet square and sixty feet high, which had almost undoubtedly been an educational center of some sort.
There were many provoking repetitions of the same material in different rooms and buildings, since certain chapters of experience, and certain summaries or phases of racial history, had evidently been favorites with different decorators or dwellers.
Sometimes, though, variant versions of the same theme proved useful in settling debatable points and filling up gaps.
I still wonder that we deduced so much in the short time at our disposal.
Of course, we even now have only the barest outline and much of that was obtained later on from a study of the photographs and sketches we made.
It may be the effect of this later study the revived memories and vague impressions acting in conjunction with his general sensitiveness and with that final supposed horror glimpse whose essence he will not reveal even to me which has been the immediate source of Danforth's present breakdown.
But it had to be for we could not issue our warning intelligently without the fullest possible information, and the issuance of that warning is a prime necessity.
Certain lingering influences in that unknown antarctic world of disordered time and alien natural law make it imperative that further exploration be discouraged.
The full story, so far as deciphered, will eventually appear in an official bulletin of Miskatonic University.
Here I shall sketch only the salient highlights in a formless, rambling way.
Myth or otherwise, the sculptures told of the coming of those star headed things to the nascent, lifeless earth out of cosmic space their coming, and the coming of many other alien entities such as at certain times embark upon spatial pioneering.
They seemed able to traverse the interstellar ether on their vast membranous wings thus oddly confirming some curious hill folklore long ago told me by an antiquarian colleague.
They had lived under the sea a good deal, building fantastic cities and fighting terrific battles with nameless adversaries by means of intricate devices employing unknown principles of energy.
Evidently their scientific and mechanical knowledge far surpassed man's to day, though they made use of its more widespread and elaborate forms only when obliged to.
Some of the sculptures suggested that they had passed through a stage of mechanized life on other planets, but had receded upon finding its effects emotionally unsatisfying.
Their preternatural toughness of organization and simplicity of natural wants made them peculiarly able to live on a high plane without the more specialized fruits of artificial manufacture, and even without garments, except for occasional protection against the elements.
It was under the sea, at first for food and later for other purposes, that they first created earth life using available substances according to long known methods.
The more elaborate experiments came after the annihilation of various cosmic enemies.
They had done the same thing on other planets, having manufactured not only necessary foods, but certain multicellular protoplasmic masses capable of molding their tissues into all sorts of temporary organs under hypnotic influence and thereby forming ideal slaves to perform the heavy work of the community.
These viscous masses were without doubt what Abdul Alhazred whispered about as the ''Shoggoths'' in his frightful Necronomicon, though even that mad Arab had not hinted that any existed on earth except in the dreams of those who had chewed a certain alkaloidal herb.
When the star headed Old Ones on this planet had synthesized their simple food forms and bred a good supply of Shoggoths, they allowed other cell groups to develop into other forms of animal and vegetable life for sundry purposes, extirpating any whose presence became troublesome.
With the aid of the Shoggoths, whose expansions could be made to lift prodigious weights, the small, low cities under the sea grew to vast and imposing labyrinths of stone not unlike those which later rose on land.
Indeed, the highly adaptable Old Ones had lived much on land in other parts of the universe, and probably retained many traditions of land construction.
As we studied the architecture of all these sculptured Palaeogaean cities, including that whose aeon dead corridors we were even then traversing, we were impressed by a curious coincidence which we have not yet tried to explain, even to ourselves.
The tops of the buildings, which in the actual city around us had, of course, been weathered into shapeless ruins ages ago, were clearly displayed in the bas reliefs, and showed vast clusters of needlelike spires, delicate finials on certain cone and pyramid apexes, and tiers of thin, horizontal scalloped disks capping cylindrical shafts.
This was exactly what we had seen in that monstrous and portentous mirage, cast by a dead city whence such sky line features had been absent for thousands and ten of thousands of years, which loomed on our ignorant eyes across the unfathomed mountains of madness as we first approached poor Lake's ill fated camp.
Of the life of the Old Ones, both under the sea and after part of them migrated to land, volumes could be written.
Those in shallow water had continued the fullest use of the eyes at the ends of their five main head tentacles, and had practiced the arts of sculpture and of writing in quite the usual way the writing accomplished with a stylus on waterproof waxen surfaces.
Those lower down in the ocean depths, though they used a curious phosphorescent organism to furnish light, pieced out their vision with obscure special senses operating through the prismatic cilia on their heads senses which rendered all the Old Ones partly independent of light in emergencies.
Their forms of sculpture and writing had changed curiously during the descent, embodying certain apparently chemical coating processes probably to secure phosphorescence which the bas reliefs could not make clear to us.
The beings moved in the sea partly by swimming using the lateral crinoid arms and partly by wriggling with the lower tier of tentacles containing the pseudofeet.
Occasionally they accomplished long swoops with the auxiliary use of two or more sets of their fan like folding wings.
On land they locally used the pseudofeet, but now and then flew to great heights or over long distances with their wings.
The many slender tentacles into which the crinoid arms branched were infinitely delicate, flexible, strong, and accurate in muscular nervous coordination ensuring the utmost skill and dexterity in all artistic and other manual operations.
The toughness of the things was almost incredible.
Even the terrific pressure of the deepest sea bottoms appeared powerless to harm them.
Very few seemed to die at all except by violence, and their burial places were very limited.
The facts that they covered their vertically inhumed dead with five pointed inscribed mounds set up thoughts in Danforth and me which made a fresh pause and recuperation necessary after the sculptures revealed it.
Illustration The toughness of the things was almost incredible.
Even terrific pressures were powerless to harm them!
The beings multiplied by means of spores like vegetable pteridophyta, as Lake had suspected but, owing to their prodigious toughness and longevity, and consequent lack of replacement needs, they did not encourage the large scale development of new prothallia except when they had new regions to colonize.
The young matured swiftly, and received an education evidently beyond any standard we can imagine.
The prevailing intellectual and aesthetic life was highly evolved, and produced a tenaciously enduring set of customs and institutions which I shall describe more fully in my coming monograph.
These varied slightly according to sea or land residence, but had the same foundations and essentials.
Though able, like vegetables, to derive nourishment from inorganic substances they vastly preferred organic and especially animal food.
They ate uncooked marine life under the sea, but cooked their viands on land.
They hunted game and raised meat herds slaughtering with sharp weapons whose odd marks on certain fossil bones our expedition had noted.
They resisted all ordinary temperatures marvelously, and in their natural state could live in water down to freezing.
When the great chill of the Pleistocene drew on, however nearly a million years ago the land dwellers had to resort to special measures, including artificial heating until, at last, the deadly cold appears to have driven them back into the sea.
For their prehistoric flights through cosmic space, legend said, they had absorbed certain chemicals and become almost independent of eating, breathing, or heat conditions but by the time of the great cold they had lost track of the method.
In any case, they could not have prolonged the artificial state indefinitely without harm.
Being nonpairing and semivegetable in structure, the Old Ones had no biological basis for the family phase of mammal life, but seemed to organize large households on the principles of comfortable space utility and as we deduced from the pictured occupations and diversions of codwellers congenial mental association.
In furnishing their homes they kept everything in the center of the huge rooms, leaving all wall spaces free for decorative treatment.
Lighting, in the case of the land inhabitants, was accomplished by a device probably electro chemical in nature.
Both on land and under water they used curious tables, chairs and couches like cylindrical frames for they rested and slept upright with folded down tentacles and racks for the hinged sets of dotted surfaces forming their books.
Government was evidently complex and probably socialistic, though no certainties in this regard could be deduced from the sculptures we saw.
There was extensive commerce, both local and between different cities certain small, flat counters, five pointed and inscribed, serving as money.
Probably the smaller of the various greenish soapstones found by our expedition were pieces of such currency.
Though the culture was mainly urban, some agriculture and much stock raising existed.
Mining and a limited amount of manufacturing were also practiced.
Travel was very frequent, but permanent migration seemed relatively rare except for the vast colonizing movements by which the race expanded.
For personal locomotion no external aid was used, since in land, air, and water movement alike the Old Ones seemed to possess excessively vast capacities for speed.
Loads, however, were drawn by beasts of burden Shoggoths under the sea, and a curious variety of primitive vertebrates in the later years of land existence.
These vertebrates, as well as an infinity of other life forms animal and vegetable, marine, terrestrial, and aerial were the products of unguided evolution acting on life cells made by the Old Ones, but escaping beyond their radius of attention.
They had been suffered to develop unchecked because they had not come in conflict with the dominant beings.
Bothersome forms, of course, were mechanically exterminated.
It interested us to see in some of the very last and most decadent sculptures a shambling, primitive mammal, used sometimes for food and sometimes as an amusing buffoon by the land dwellers, whose vaguely simian and human foreshadowings were unmistakable.
In the building of land cities the huge stone blocks of the high towers were generally lifted by vast winged pterodactyls of a species heretofore unknown to palaeontology.
The persistence with which the Old Ones survived various geologic changes and convulsions of the earth's crust was little short of miraculous.
Though few or none of their first cities seem to have remained beyond the Archaean Age, there was no interruption in their civilization or in the transmission of their records.
Their original place of advent to the planet was the Antarctic Ocean, and it is likely that they came not long after the matter forming the moon was wrenched from the neighboring South Pacific.
According to one of the sculptured maps, the whole globe was then under water, with stone cities scattered farther and farther from the antarctic as aeons passed.
Another map shows a vast bulk of dry land around the south pole, where it is evident that some of the beings made experimental settlements, though their main centers were transferred to the nearest sea bottom.
Later maps, which display this land mass as cracking and drifting, and sending certain detached parts northward, uphold in a striking way the theories of continental drift lately advanced by Taylor, Wegener, and Joly.
With the upheaval of new land in the South Pacific, tremendous events began.
Some of the marine cities were hopelessly shattered, yet that was not the worst misfortune.
Another race a land race of beings shaped like octopi and probably corresponding to the fabulous prehuman spawn of Cthulhu soon began filtering down from cosmic infinity and precipitated a monstrous war which for a time drove the Old Ones wholly back to the sea a colossal blow in view of the increasing land settlements.
Later, peace was made, and the new lands were given to the Cthulhu spawn whilst the Old Ones held the sea and the older lands.
New land cities were founded the greatest of them in the antarctic, for this region of first arrival was sacred.
From then on, as before, the antarctic remained the center of the Old Ones' civilization, and all the cities built there by the Cthulhu spawn were blotted out.
Then, suddenly, the lands of the Pacific sank again, taking with them the frightful stone city of R'lyeh and all the cosmic octopi, so that the Old Ones were again supreme on the planet, except for one shadowy fear about which they did not like to speak.
At a rather later age their cities dotted all the land and water areas of the globe hence the recommendation in my coming monograph that some archaeologist make systematic borings with Pabodie's type of apparatus in certain widely separated regions.
The steady trend down the ages was from water to land a movement encouraged by the rise of new land masses, though the ocean was never wholly deserted.
Another cause of the landward movement was the new difficulty in breeding and managing the Shoggoths upon which successful sea life depended.
With the march of time, as the sculptures sadly confessed, the art of creating new life from inorganic matter had been lost, so that the Old Ones had to depend on the molding of forms already in existence.
On land the great reptiles proved highly tractable but the Shoggoths of the sea, reproducing by fission and acquiring a dangerous degree of accidental intelligence, presented for a time a formidable problem.
They had always been controlled through the hypnotic suggestion of the Old Ones, and had modeled their tough plasticity into various useful temporary limbs and organs but now their self modeling powers were sometimes exercised independently, and in various imitative forms implanted by past suggestion.
They had, it seems, developed a semistable brain whose separate and occasionally stubborn volition echoed the will of the Old Ones without always obeying it.
Sculptured images of these Shoggoths filled Danforth and me with horror and loathing.
They were normally shapeless entities composed of a viscous jelly which looked like an agglutination of bubbles, and each averaged about fifteen feet in diameter when a sphere.
They had, however, a constantly shifting shape and volume throwing out temporary developments or forming apparent organs of sight, hearing, and speech in imitation of their masters, either spontaneously or according to suggestion.
They seem to have become peculiarly intractable toward the middle of the Permian Age, perhaps one hundred and fifty million years ago, when a veritable war of resubjugation was waged upon them by the marine Old Ones.
Pictures of this war, and of the headless, slime coated fashion in which the Shoggoths typically left their slain victims, held a marvelously fearsome quality despite the intervening abyss of untold ages.
The Old Ones had used curious weapons of molecular disturbance against the rebel entities, and in the end had achieved a complete victory.
Thereafter the sculptures showed a period in which Shoggoths were tamed and broken by armed Old Ones as the wild horses of the American west were tamed by cowboys.
Though during the rebellion the Shoggoths had shown an ability to live out of water, this transition was not encouraged since their usefulness on land would hardly have been commensurate with the trouble of their management.
During the Jurassic Age the Old Ones met fresh adversity in the form of a new invasion from outer space this time by half fungous, half crustacean creatures creatures undoubtedly the same as those figuring in certain whispered hill legends of the north, and remembered in the Himalayas as the Mi Go, or Abominable Snow Men.
To fight these beings the Old Ones attempted, for the first time since their terrene advent, to sally forth again into the planetary ether but, despite all traditional preparations, found it no longer possible to leave the earth's atmosphere.
Whatever the old secret of interstellar travel had been, it was now definitely lost to the race.
In the end the Mi Go drove the Old Ones out of all the northern lands, though they were powerless to disturb those in the sea.
Little by little the slow retreat of the elder race to their original antarctic habitat was beginning.
It was curious to note from the pictured battles that both the Cthulhu spawn and the Mi Go seem to have been composed of matter more widely different from that which we know than was the substance of the Old Ones.
They were able to undergo transformations and reintegrations impossible for their adversaries, and seem therefore to have originally come from even remoter gulfs of cosmic space.
The Old Ones, but for their abnormal toughness and peculiar vital properties, were strictly material, and must have had their absolute origin within the known space time continuum whereas the first sources of the other beings can only be guessed at with bated breath.
All this, of course, assuming that the nonterrestrial linkages and the anomalies ascribed to the invading foes are not pure mythology.
Conceivably, the Old Ones might have invented a cosmic framework to account for their occasional defeats, since historical interest and pride obviously formed their chief psychological element.
It is significant that their annals failed to mention many advanced and potent races of beings whose mighty cultures and towering ethics figure persistently in certain obscure legends.
The changing state of the world through long geologic ages appeared with startling vividness in many of the sculptured maps and scenes.
In certain cases existing science will require revision, while in other cases its bold deductions are magnificently confirmed.
As I have said, the hypothesis of Taylor, Wegener, and Joly that all the continents are fragments of an original antarctic land mass which cracked from centrifugal force and drifted apart over a technically viscous lower surface an hypothesis suggested by such things as the complimentary outlines of Africa and South America, and the way the great mountain chains are rolled and shoved up receives striking support from this uncanny source.
Maps evidently showing the Carboniferous of a hundred million or more years ago displayed significant rifts and chasms destined later to separate Africa from the once continuous realms of Europe then the Valusia of primal legend, Asia, the Americas, and the antarctic continent.
Other charts and most significantly one in connection with the founding fifty million years ago of the vast dead city around us showed all the present continents well differentiated.
And in the latest discoverable specimen dating perhaps from the Pliocene Age the approximate world of to day appeared quite clearly despite the linkage of Alaska with Siberia, of North America with Europe through Greenland, and of South America with the antarctic continent through Graham Land.
In the Carboniferous map the whole globe ocean floor and rifted land mass alike bore symbols of the Old Ones' vast stone cities, but in the later charts the gradual recession toward the antarctic became very plain.
The final Pliocene specimen showed no land cities except on the antarctic continent and the tip of South America, nor any ocean cities north of the fiftieth parallel of South Latitude.
Knowledge and interest in the northern world, save for a study of coast lines probably made during long exploration flights on those fan like membranous wings, had evidently declined to zero among the Old Ones.
Destruction of cities through the up thrust of mountains, the centrifugal rending of continents, the seismic convulsions of land or sea bottom, and other natural causes was a matter of common record and it was curious to observe how fewer and fewer replacements were made as the ages wore on.
The vast dead megalopolis that yawned around us seemed to be the last general center of the race built early in the Cretaceous Age after a titanic earth buckling had obliterated a still vaster predecessor not far distant.
It appeared that this general region was the most sacred spot of all, where reputedly the first Old Ones had settled on a primal sea bottom.
In the new city many of whose features we could recognize in the sculptures, but which stretched fully a hundred miles along the mountain range in each direction beyond the farthest limits of our aerial survey there were reputed to be preserved certain sacred stones forming part of the first sea bottom city, which were thrust up to light after long epochs in the course of the general crumpling of strata.
Naturally, Danforth and I studied with special interest and a peculiarly personal sense of awe everything pertaining to the immediate district in which we were.
Of this local material there was naturally a vast abundance.
On the tangled ground level of the city we were lucky enough to find a house of very late date whose walls, though somewhat damaged by a neighboring rift, contained sculptures of decadent workmanship carrying the story of the region, much beyond the Pliocene map, whence we derived our last general glimpse of the prehuman world.
This was the last place we examined in detail, since what we found there set upon us a fresh, immediate objective.
Certainly, we were in one of the strangest, weirdest, and most terrible of all the corners of earth's globe.
Of all existing lands it was infinitely the most ancient.
The conviction grew upon us that this hideous upland must indeed be the fabled nightmare plateau of Leng which even the mad author of the Necronomicon was reluctant to discuss.
The great mountain chain was tremendously long starting as a low range at Luitpold Land on the coast of Weddell Sea and virtually crossing the entire continent.
The really high part stretched in a mighty arc from about Latitude 82 degrees, E. Longitude 60 degrees to Latitude 70 degrees, East Longitude 115 degrees, with its concave side toward our camp and its seaward end in the region of that long, ice locked coast whose hills were glimpsed by Wilkes and Mawson at the antarctic circle.
Yet even more monstrous exaggerations of nature seemed disturbingly close at hand.
I have said that these peaks are higher than the Himalayas, but the sculptures forbid me to say that they are earth's highest.
That grim honor is beyond doubt reserved for something which half the sculptures hesitated to record at all, whilst others approached it with obvious repugnance and trepidation.
It seems that there was one part of the ancient land the first part that ever rose from the waters after the earth had flung off the moon and the Old Ones had seeped down from the stars which had come to be shunned as vaguely and namelessly evil.
Cities built there had crumbled before their time, and had been found suddenly deserted.
Then when the first great earth buckling had convulsed the region in the Comanchean Age, a frightful line of peaks had shot suddenly up amidst the most appalling din and chaos and earth had received her loftiest and most terrible mountains.
If the scale of the carvings was correct, these abhorred things must have been much over forty thousand feet high radically vaster than even the shocking mountains of madness we had crossed.
They extended, it appeared, from about Latitude 77 degrees, E. Longitude 70 degrees to Latitude 70 degrees, E. Longitude 100 degrees less than three hundred miles away from the dead city, so that we would have spied their dreaded summits in the dim western distance had it not been for that vague, opalescent haze.
Their northern end must likewise be visible from the long antarctic circle coast line at Queen Mary Land.
Some of the Old Ones, in the decadent days, had made strange prayers to those mountains but none ever went near them or dared to guess what lay beyond.
No human eye had ever seen them, and as I studied the emotions conveyed in the carvings I prayed that none ever might.
There are protecting hills along the coast beyond them Queen Mary and Kaiser Wilhelm Lands and I thank Heaven no one has been able to land and climb those hills.
I am not as sceptical about old tales and fears as I used to be, and I do not laugh now at the prehuman sculptor's notion that lightning paused meaningfully now and then at each of the brooding crests, and that an unexplained glow shone from one of those terrible pinnacles all through the long polar night.
There may be a very real and very monstrous meaning in the old Pnakotic whispers about Kadath in the Cold Waste.
But the terrain close at hand was hardly less strange, even if less namelessly accursed.
Soon after the founding of the city the great mountain range became the seat of the principal temples, and many carvings showed what grotesque and fantastic towers had pierced the sky where now we saw only the curiously clinging cubes and ramparts.
In the course of ages the caves had appeared, and had been shaped into adjuncts of the temples.
With the advance of still later epochs all the limestone veins of the region were hollowed out by ground waters, so that the mountains, the foothills, and the plains below them were a veritable network of connected caverns and galleries.
Many graphic sculptures told of explorations deep underground, and of the final discovery of the Stygian sunless sea that lurked at earth's bowels.
This vast nighted gulf had undoubtedly been worn by the great river which flowed down from the nameless and horrible westward mountains, and which had formerly turned at the base of the Old Ones' range and flowed beside that chain into the Indian Ocean between Budd and Totten Lands on Wilkes's coast line.
Little by little it had eaten away the limestone hill base at its turning, till at last its sapping currents reached the caverns of the ground waters and joined with them in digging a deeper abyss.
Finally its whole bulk emptied into the hollow hills and left the old bed toward the ocean dry.
Much of the later city as we now found it had been built over that former bed.
The Old Ones, understanding what had happened, and exercising their always keen artistic sense, had carved into ornate pylons those headlands of the foothills where the great stream began its descent into eternal darkness.
This river, once crossed by scores of noble stone bridges, was plainly the one whose extinct course we had seen in our aeroplane survey.
Its position in different carvings of the city helped us to orient ourselves to the scene as it had been at various stages of the region's age long, aeon dead history, so that we were able to sketch a hasty but careful map of the salient features squares, important buildings, and the like for guidance in further explorations.
We could soon reconstruct in fancy the whole stupendous thing as it was a million or ten million or fifty million years ago, for the sculptures told us exactly what the buildings and mountains and squares and suburbs and landscape setting and luxuriant Tertiary vegetation had looked like.
It must have had a marvelous and mystic beauty, and as I thought of it I almost forgot the clammy sense of sinister oppression with which the city's inhuman age and massiveness and deadness and remoteness and glacial twilight had choked and weighed on my spirit.
Yet, according to certain carvings the denizens of that city had themselves known the clutch of oppressive terror for there was a somber and recurrent type of scene in which the Old Ones were shown in the act of recoiling affrightedly from some object never allowed to appear in the design found in the great river and indicated as having been washed down through waving, vine draped cycad forests from those horrible westward mountains.
It was only in the one late built house with the decadent carvings that we obtained any foreshadowing of the final calamity leading to the city's desertion.
Undoubtedly there must have been many sculptures of the same age elsewhere, even allowing for the slackened energies and aspirations of a stressful and uncertain period indeed, very certain evidence of the existence of others came to us shortly afterward.
But this was the first and only set we directly encountered.
We meant to look farther later on but as I have said, immediate conditions dictated another present objective.
There would, though, have been a limit for after all hope of a long future occupancy of the place had perished among the Old Ones, there could not but have been a complete cessation of mural decoration.
The ultimate blow, of course, was the coming of the great cold which once held most of the earth in thrall, and which has never departed from the ill fated poles the great cold that, at the world's other extremity, put an end to the fabled lands of Lomar and Hyperborea.
Just when this tendency began in the antarctic it would be hard to say in terms of exact years.
Nowadays we set the beginning of the general glacial periods at a distance of about five hundred thousand years from the present, but at the poles the terrible scourge must have commenced much earlier.
All quantitative estimates are partly guesswork, but it is quite likely that the decadent sculptures were made considerably less than a million years ago, and that the actual desertion of the city was complete long before the conventional opening of the Pleistocene five hundred thousand years ago as reckoned in terms of the earth's whole surface.
In the decadent sculptures there were signs of thinner vegetation everywhere, and of a decreased country life on the part of the Old Ones.
Heating devices were shown in the houses, and winter travelers were represented as muffled in protective fabrics.
Then we saw a series of cartouches the continuous band arrangement being frequently interrupted in these late carvings depicting a constantly growing migration to the nearest refuges of greater warmth some fleeing to cities under the sea off the far away coast, and some clambering down through networks of limestone caverns in the hollow hills to the neighboring black abyss of subterrane waters.
In the end, it seems to have been the neighboring abyss which received the greatest colonization.
This was partly due, no doubt, to the traditional sacredness of this special region, but may have been more conclusively determined by the opportunities it gave for continuing the use of the great temples on the honeycombed mountains, and for retaining the vast land city as a place of summer residence and base of communication with various mines.
The linkage of old and new abodes was made more effective by means of several gradings and improvements along the connecting routes, including the chiseling of numerous direct tunnels from the ancient metropolis to the black abyss sharply down pointing tunnels whose mouths we carefully drew, according to our most thoughtful estimates, on the guide map we were compiling.
It was obvious that at least two of these tunnels lay within a reasonable exploring distance of where we were both being on the mountainward edge of the city, one less than a quarter of a mile toward the ancient rivercourse, and the other perhaps twice that distance in the opposite direction.
The abyss, it seems, had shelving shores of dry land at certain places, but the Old Ones built their new city under water no doubt because of its greater certainty of uniform warmth.
The depth of the hidden sea appears to have been very great, so that the earth's internal heat could insure its habitability for an indefinite period.
The beings seem to have had no trouble in adapting themselves to part time and eventually, of course, whole time residence under water, since they had never allowed their gill systems to atrophy.
There were many sculptures which showed how they had always frequently visited their submarine kinsfolk elsewhere, and how they had habitually bathed on the deep bottom of their great river.
The darkness of inner earth could likewise have been no deterrent to a race accustomed to long antarctic nights.
Decadent though their style undoubtedly was, these latest carvings had a truly epic quality where they told of the building of the new city in the cavern sea.
The Old Ones had gone about it scientifically quarrying insoluble rocks from the heart of the honeycombed mountains, and employing expert workers from the nearest submarine city to perform the construction according to the best methods.
These workers brought with them all that was necessary to establish the new venture Shoggoth tissue from which to breed stone lifters and subsequent beasts of burden for the cavern city, and other protoplasmic matter to mold into phosphorescent organisms for lighting purposes.
At last a mighty metropolis rose on the bottom of that Stygian sea, its architecture much like that of the city above, and its workmanship displaying relatively little decadence because of the precise mathematical element inherent in building operations.
The newly bred Shoggoths grew to enormous size and singular intelligence, and were represented as taking and executing orders with marvelous quickness.
They seemed to converse with the Old Ones by mimicking their voices a sort of musical piping over a wide range, if poor Lake's dissection had indicated aright and to work more from spoken commands than from hypnotic suggestions as in earlier times.
They were, however, kept in admirable control.
The phosphorescent organisms supplied light with vast effectiveness, and doubtless atoned for the loss of the familiar polar auroras of the outer world night.
Art and decoration were pursued, though, of course, with a certain decadence.
The Old Ones seemed to realize this falling off themselves, and in many cases anticipated the policy of Constantine the Great by transplanting especially fine blocks of ancient carving from their land city, just as the emperor, in a similar age of decline, stripped Greece and Asia of their finest art to give his new Byzantine capital greater splendors than its own people could create.
That the transfer of sculptured blocks had not been more extensive, was doubtless owing to the fact that the land city was not at first wholly abandoned.
By the time total abandonment did occur and it surely must have occurred before the polar Pleistocene was far advanced the Old Ones had perhaps become satisfied with their decadent art or had ceased to recognize the superior merit of the older carvings.
At any rate, the aeon silent ruins around us had certainly undergone no wholesale sculptural denudation, though all the best separate statues, like other movables, had been taken away.
The decadent cartouches and dados telling this story were, as I have said, the latest we could find in our limited search.
They left us with a picture of the Old Ones shuttling back and forth betwixt the land city in summer and the sea cavern city in winter, and sometimes trading with the sea bottom cities off the antarctic coast.
By this time the ultimate doom of the land city must have been recognized, for the sculptures showed many signs of the cold's malign encroachments.
Vegetation was declining, and the terrible snows of the winter no longer melted completely even in midsummer.
The saurian live stock were nearly all dead, and the mammals were standing it none too well.
To keep on with the work of the upper world it had become necessary to adapt some of the amorphous and curiously cold resistant Shoggoths to land life a thing the Old Ones had formerly been reluctant to do.
The great river was now lifeless, and the upper sea had lost most of its denizens except the seals and whales.
All the birds had flown away, save only the great, grotesque penguins.
What had happened afterward we could only guess.
How long had the new sea cavern city survived?
Was it still down there, a stony corpse in eternal blackness?
Had the subterranean waters frozen at last?
To what fate had the ocean bottom cities of the outer world been delivered?
Had any of the Old Ones shifted north ahead of the creeping ice cap?
Existing geology shows no trace of their presence.
Had the frightful Mi Go been still a menace in the outer land world of the north?
Could one be sure of what might or might not linger, even to this day, in the lightless and unplumbed abysses of earth's deepest water?
Those things had seemingly been able to withstand any amount of pressure and men of the sea have fished up curious objects at times.
And has the killer whale theory really explained the savage and mysterious scars on antarctic seals noticed a generation ago by Borchgrevingk?
The specimens found by poor Lake did not enter into these guesses, for their geologic setting proved them to have lived at what must have been a very early date in the land city's history.
They were, according to their location, certainly not less than thirty million years old, and we reflected that in their day the sea cavern city, and indeed the cavern itself, had had no existence.
They would have remembered an older scene, with lush Tertiary vegetation everywhere, a younger land city of flourishing arts around them, and a great river sweeping northward along the base of the mighty mountains toward a far away tropic ocean.
And yet we could not help thinking about these specimens especially about the eight perfect ones that were missing from Lake's hideously ravaged camp.
There was something abnormal about that whole business the strange things we had tried so hard to lay to somebody's madness those frightful graves the amount and nature of the missing material Gedney the unearthly toughness of those archaic monstrosities, and the queer vital freaks the sculptures now showed the race to have  Danforth and I had seen a good deal in the last few hours, and were prepared to believe and keep silent about many appalling and incredible secrets of primal nature.
I have said that our study of the decadent sculptures brought about a change in our immediate objective.
This, of course, had to do with the chiseled avenues to the black inner world, of whose existence we had not known before, but which we were now eager to find and traverse.
From the evident scale of the carvings we deduced that a steeply descending walk of about a mile through either of the neighboring tunnels would bring us to the brink of the dizzy, sunless cliffs about the great abyss, down whose side paths, improved by the Old Ones, led to the rocky shore of the hidden and nighted ocean.
To behold this fabulous gulf in stark reality was a lure which seemed impossible of resistance once we knew of the thing yet we realized we must begin the quest at once if we expected to include it in our present trip.
In was now eight p.m., and we had not enough battery replacements to let our torches burn on forever.
We had done so much of our studying and copying below the glacial level that our battery supply had had at least five hours of nearly continuous use, and despite the special dry cell formula would obviously be good for only about four more though by keeping one torch unused, except for especially interesting or difficult places, we might manage to eke out a safe margin beyond that.
It would not do to be without a light in these Cyclopean catacombs, hence in order to make the abyss trip we must give up all further mural deciphering.
Of course, we intended to revisit the place for days and perhaps weeks of intensive study and photography curiosity having long ago gotten the better of horror but just now we must hasten.
Our supply of trail blazing paper was far from unlimited, and we were reluctant to sacrifice spare notebooks or sketching paper to augment it, but we did let one large notebook go.
If worst came to worst, we could resort to rock chipping and, of course, it would be possible, even in case of really lost direction, to work up to full daylight by one channel or another if granted sufficient time for plentiful trial and error.
So, at last, we set off eagerly in the indicated direction of the nearest tunnel.
According to the carvings from which we had made our map, the desired tunnel mouth could not be much more than a quarter of a mile from where we stood the intervening space showing solid looking buildings quite likely to be penetrable still at a subglacial level.
The opening itself would be in the basement on the angle nearest the foothills of a vast five pointed structure of evidently public and perhaps ceremonial nature, which we tried to identify from our aerial survey of the ruins.
No such structure came to our minds as we recalled our flight, hence we concluded that its upper parts had been greatly damaged, or that it had been totally shattered in an ice rift we had noticed.
In the latter case the tunnel would probably turn out to be choked, so that we would have to try the next nearest one the one less than a mile to the north.
The intervening river course prevented our trying any of the more southern tunnels on this trip and indeed, if both of the neighboring ones were choked it was doubtful whether our batteries would warrant an attempt on the next northerly one about a mile beyond our second choice.
As we threaded our dim way through the labyrinth with the aid of map and compass traversing rooms and corridors in every stage of ruin or preservation, clambering up ramps, crossing upper floors and bridges and clambering down again, encountering choked doorways and piles of debris, hastening now and then along finely preserved and uncannily immaculate stretches, taking false leads and retracing our way in such cases removing the blind paper trail we had left, and once in a while striking the bottom of an open shaft through which daylight poured or trickled down we were repeatedly tantalized by the sculptured walls along our route.
We had wormed our way very close to the computed site of the tunnel's mouth having crossed a second story bridge to what seemed plainly the tip of a pointed wall, and descended to a ruinous corridor especially rich in decadently elaborate and apparently ritualistic sculptures of late workmanship when, about eight thirty p.m., Danforth's keen young nostrils gave us the first hint of something unusual.
If we had had a dog with us, I suppost we would have been warned before.
At first we could not precisely say what was wrong with the formerly crystal pure air, but after a few seconds our memories reached only too definitely.
Let me try to state the thing without flinching.
There was an odor and that odor was vaguely, subtly, and unmistakably akin to what had nauseated us upon opening the insane grave of the horror poor Lake had dissected.
Of course, the revelation was not as clearly cut at the time as it sounds now.
There were several conceivable explanations, and we did a good deal of indecisive whispering.
Most important of all, we did not retreat without further investigation for having come this far, we were loath to be balked by anything short of certain disaster.
Anyway, what we must have suspected was altogether too wild to believe.
Such things did not happen in any normal world.
It was probably sheer irrational instinct which made us dim our single torch tempted no longer by the decadent and sinister sculptures that leered menacingly from the oppressive walls and which softened our progress to a cautious tiptoeing and crawling over the increasingly littered floor and heaps of debris.
Danforth's eyes as well as nose proved better than mine, for it was likewise he who first noticed the queer aspect of the debris after we had passed many half choked arches leading to chambers and corridors on the ground level.
It did not look quite as it ought after countless thousands of years of desertion, and when we cautiously turned on more light we saw that a kind of swath seemed to have been lately tracked through it.
The irregular nature of the latter precluded any definite marks, but in the smoother places there were suggestions of the dragging of heavy objects.
Once we thought there was a hint of parallel tracks, as if of runners.
This was what made us pause again.
It was during that pause that we caught simultaneously this time the other odor ahead.
Paradoxically, it was both a less frightful and a more frightful odor less frightful intrinsically, but infinitely appalling in this place under the known circumstances unless, of course, Gedney  For the odor was the plain and familiar one of common petrol every day gasoline.
Our motivation after that is something I will leave to psychologists.
We knew now that some terrible extension of the camp horrors must have crawled into this nighted burial place of the aeons, hence could not doubt any longer the existence of nameless conditions present or at least recent just ahead.
Yet in the end we did let sheer burning curiosity or anxiety or autohypnotism or vague thoughts of responsibility toward Gedney of what not drive us on.
Danforth whispered again of the print he thought he had seen at the alley turning in the ruins above and of the faint musical piping potentially of tremendous significance in the light of Lake's dissection report, despite its close resemblance to the cave mouth echoes of the windy peaks which he thought he had shortly afterward half heard from unknown depths below.
I, in my turn, whispered of how the camp was left of what had disappeared, and of how the madness of a lone survivor might have conceived the inconceivable a wild trip across the monstrous mountains and a descent into the unknown, primal masonry    But we could not convince each other, or even ourselves, of anything definite.
We had turned off all light as we stood still, and vaguely noticed that a trace of deeply filtered upper daylight kept the blackness from being absolute.
Having automatically begun to move ahead, we guided ourselves by occasional flashes from our torch.
The disturbed debris formed an impression we could not shake off, and the smell of gasoline grew stronger.
More and more ruin met our eyes and hampered our feet, until very soon we saw that the forward way was about to cease.
We had been all too correct in our pessimistic guess about that rift glimpsed from the air.
Our tunnel quest was a blind one, and we were not even going to be able to reach the basement out of which the abyssward aperture opened.
The torch, flashing over the grotesquely carved walls of the blocked corridor in which we stood, showed several doorways in various states of obstruction and from one of them the gasoline odor quite submerging that other hint of odor came with especial distinctness.
As we looked more steadily, we saw that beyond a doubt there had been a slight and recent clearing away of debris from that particular opening.
Whatever the lurking horror might be, we believed the direct avenue toward it was now plainly manifest.
I do not think any one will wonder that we waited an appreciable time before making any further motion.
And yet, when we did venture inside that black arch, our first impression was one of anticlimax.
For amidst the littered expanse of that sculptured crypt a perfect cube with sides of about twenty feet there remained no recent object of instantly discernible size so that we looked instinctively, though in vain, for a farther doorway.
In another moment, however, Danforth's sharp vision had discovered a place where the floor debris had been disturbed.
We turned on both torches full strength.
Though what we saw in that light was actually simple and trifling, I am none the less reluctant to tell of it because of what it implied.
It was a rough leveling of the debris, upon which several small objects lay carelessly scattered, and at one corner of which a considerable amount of gasoline must have been spilled lately enough to leave a strong odor even at this extreme superplateau altitude.
In other words, it could not be other than a sort of camp a camp made by questing beings who, like us, had been turned back by the unexpectedly choked way to the abyss.
Let me be plain.
The scattered objects were, so far as substance was concerned, all from Lake's camp, and consisted of tin cans as queerly opened as those we had seen at that ravaged place, many spent matches, three illustrated books more or less curiously smudged, an empty ink bottle with its pictorial and instructional carton, a broken fountain pen, some oddly snipped fragments of fur and tent cloth, a used electric battery with circular of directions, a folder that came with our type of tent heater, and a sprinkling of crumpled papers.
It was all bad enough, but when we smoothed out the papers and looked at what was on them we felt we had come to the worst.
We had found certain inexplicably blotted papers at the camp which might have prepared us, yet the effect of the sight, down there in the prehuman vaults of a nightmare city, was almost too much to bear.
A mad Gedney might have made the groups of dots in imitation of those found on the greenish soapstones, just as the dots on those insane five pointed grave mounds might have been made and he might conceivably have prepared rough, hasty sketches varying in their accuracy or lack of it which outlined the neighboring parts of the city and traced the way from a circularly represented place outside our previous route a place we identified as a great cylindrical tower in the carvings and as a vast circular gulf glimpsed in our aerial survey to the present five pointed structure and the tunnel mouth therein.
He might, I repeat, have prepared such sketches for those before us were quite obviously compiled, as our own had been, from late sculptures somewhere in the glacial labyrinth, though not from the ones which we had seen and used.
But what this art blind bungler could never have done was to execute those sketches in a strange and assured technique perhaps superior, despite haste and carelessness, to any of the decadent carvings from which they were taken the characteristic and unmistakable technique of the Old Ones themselves in the dead city's heyday.
There are those who will say Danforth and I were utterly mad not to flee for our lives after that since our conclusions were now notwithstanding their wildness completely fixed, and of a nature I need not even mention to those who have read my account as far as this.
Perhaps we were mad for have I not said those horrible peaks were mountains of madness?
But I think I can detect something of the same spirit albeit in a less extreme form in the men who stalk deadly beasts through African jungles to photograph them or study their habits.
Half paralyzed with terror though we were, there was nevertheless fanned within us a blazing flame of awe and curiosity which triumphed in the end.
Of course, we did not mean to face that or those which we knew had been there, but we felt that they must be gone by now.
They would by this time have found the other neighboring entrance to the abyss, and have passed within, to whatever night black fragments of the past might await them in the ultimate gulf the ultimate gulf they had never seen.
Or if that entrance, too, was blocked, they would have gone on to the north seeking another.
They were, we remembered, partly independent of light.
Looking back to that moment, I can scarcely recall just what precise form our new emotions took just what change of immediate objective it was that so sharpened our sense of expectancy.
We certainly did not mean to face what we feared yet I will not deny that we may have had a lurking, unconscious wish to spy certain things from some hidden vantage point.
Probably we had not given up our zeal to glimpse the abyss itself, though there was interposed a new goal in the form of that great circular place shown on the crumpled sketches we had found.
We had at once recognized it as a monstrous cylindrical tower in the carvings, but appearing only as a prodigious, round aperture from above.
Something about the impressiveness of its rendering, even in these hasty diagrams, made us think that its subglacial levels must still form a feature of peculiar importance.
Perhaps it embodied architectural marvels as yet unencountered by us.
It was certainly of incredible age, according to the sculptures in which it figured being indeed among the first things built in the city.
Its carvings, if preserved, could not but be highly significant.
Moreover, it might form a good present link with the upper world a shorter route than the one we were so carefully blazing and probably that by which those others had descended.
At any rate, the thing we did was to study the terrible sketches which quite perfectly confirmed our own and start back over the indicated course to the circular place the course which our nameless predecessors must have traversed twice before us.
The other neighboring gate to the abyss would lie beyond that.
I need not speak of our journey during which we continued to leave an economical trail of paper for it was precisely the same in kind as that by which we had reached the cul de sac, except that it tended to adhere more closely to the ground level and even descend to basement corridors.
Every now and then we could trace certain disturbing marks in the debris or litter underfoot and, after we had passed outside the radius of the gasoline scent, we were again faintly conscious spasmodically of that more hideous and more persistent scent.
After the way had branched from our former course, we sometimes gave the rays of our single torch a furtive sweep along the walls noting in almost every case the well nigh omnipresent sculptures, which indeed seem to have formed a main aesthetic outlet for the Old Ones.
About nine thirty p.m., while traversing a vaulted corridor whose increasingly glaciated floor seemed somewhat below the ground level and whose roof grew lower as we advanced, we began to see strong daylight ahead and were able to turn off our torch.
It appeared that we were coming to the vast, circular place, and that our distance from the upper air could not be very great.
The corridor ended in an arch, surprisingly low for these megalithic ruins, but we could see much through it even before we emerged.
Beyond, there stretched a prodigious round space fully two hundred feet in diameter strewn with debris and containing many choked archways corresponding to the one we were about to cross.
The walls were in available spaces boldly sculptured into a spiral band of heroic proportions and displayed, despite the destructive weathering caused by the openness of the spot, an artistic splendor far beyond anything we had encountered before.
The littered floor was quite heavily glaciated, and we fancied that the true bottom lay at a considerably lower depth.
But the salient object of the place was the titanic stone ramp which, eluding the archways by a sharp turn outward into the open floor, wound spirally up the stupendous cylindrical wall like an inside counterpart of those once climbing outside the monstrous towers or zikkurats of antique Babylon.
Only the rapidity of our flight, and the perspective which confounded the descent with the tower's inner wall, had prevented our noticing this feature from the air, and thus caused us to seek another avenue to the subglacial level.
Pabodie might have been able to tell what sort of engineering held it in place, but Danforth and I could merely admire and marvel.
We could see mighty stone corbels and pillars here and there, but what we saw seemed inadequate to the function performed.
The thing was excellently preserved up to the present top of the tower a highly remarkable circumstance in view of its exposure and its shelter had done much to protect the bizarre and disturbing cosmic sculptures on the walls.
As we stepped out into the awesome half daylight of this monstrous cylinder bottom fifty million years old, and without doubt the most primally ancient structure ever to meet our eyes we saw that the ramp traversed sides stretched dizzily up to a height of fully sixty feet.
This, we recalled from our aerial survey, meant an outside glaciation of some forty feet since the yawning gulf we had seen from the plane had been at the top of an approximately twenty foot mound of crumbled masonry, somewhat sheltered for three fourths of its circumference by the massive curving walls of a line of higher ruins.
According to the sculptures the original tower had stood in the center of an immense circular plaza, and had been perhaps five hundred or six hundred feet high, with tiers of horizontal disks near the top, and a row of needlelike spires along the upper rim.
Most of the masonry had obviously toppled outward rather than inward a fortunate happening, since otherwise the ramp might have been shattered and the whole interior choked.
As it was, the ramp showed sad battering whilst the choking was such that all the archways seemed to have been half cleared.
It took us only a moment to conclude that this was indeed the route by which those others had descended, and that this would be the logical route for our own ascent, despite the long trail of paper we had left elsewhere.
The tower's mouth was no farther from the foothills and our waiting plane than was the great terraced building we had entered, and any further subglacial exploration we might make on this trip would lie in this general region.
Oddly, we were still thinking about possible later trips even after all we had seen and guessed.
Then, as we picked our way cautiously over the debris of the great floor, there came a sight which for the time excluded all other matters.
It was the neatly huddled array of three sledges in that farther angle of the ramp's lower and outward projecting course which had hitherto been screened from our view.
There they were the three sledges missing from Lake's camp shaken by a hard usage which must have included forcible dragging along great reaches of snowless masonry and debris, as well as much hand portage over utterly unnavigable places.
They were carefully and intelligently packed and strapped, and contained things memorably familiar enough the gasoline stove, fuel cans, instrument cases, provision tins, tarpaulins obviously bulging with books, and some bulging with less obvious contents everything derived from Lake's equipment.
After what we had found in that other room, we were in a measure prepared for this encounter.
The really great shock came when we stepped over and undid one tarpaulin, whose outlines had peculiarly disquieted us.
It seems that others as well as Lake had been interested in collecting typical specimens for there were two here, both stiffly frozen, perfectly preserved, patched with adhesive plaster where some wounds around the neck had occurred, and wrapped with care to prevent further damage.
They were the bodies of young Gedney and the missing dog.
Many people will probably judge us callous as well as mad for thinking about the northward tunnel and the abyss so soon after our somber discovery, and I am not prepared to say that we would have immediately revived such thoughts but for a specific circumstance which broke in upon us and set up a whole new train of speculations.
We had replaced the tarpaulin over poor Gedney and were standing in a kind of mute bewilderment when the sounds finally reached our consciousness the first sounds we had heard since descending out of the open where the mountain wind whined faintly from its unearthly heights.
Well known and mundane though they were, their presence in this remote world of death was more unexpected and unnerving than any grotesque or fabulous tones could possibly have been since they gave a fresh upsetting to all our notions of cosmic harmony.
Had it been some trace of that bizarre musical piping over a wide range, which Lake's dissection report had led us to expect in those others and which, indeed, our overwrought fancies had been reading into every wind howl we had heard since coming on the camp horror it would have had a kind of hellish congruity with the aeon dead region around us.
A voice from other epochs belongs in a graveyard of other epochs.
As it was, however, the noise shattered all our profoundly seated adjustments all out tacit acceptance of the inner antarctic as a waste utterly and irrevocably void of every vestige of normal life.
What we heard was not the fabulous note of any buried blasphemy of elder earth from whose supernal toughness an age denied polar sun had evoked a monstrous response.
Instead, it was a thing so mockingly normal and so unerringly familiarized by our sea days off Victoria Land and our camp days at McMurdo Sound that we shuddered to think of it here, where such things ought not to be.
To be brief it was simply the raucous squawking of a penguin.
The muffled sound floated from subglacial recesses nearly opposite to the corridor whence we had come regions manifestly in the direction of that other tunnel to the vast abyss.
The presence of a living water bird in such a direction in a world whose surface was one of age long and uniform lifelessness could lead to only one conclusion hence our first thought was to verify the objective reality of the sound.
It was, indeed, repeated, and seemed at times to come from more than one throat.
Seeking its source, we entered an archway from which much debris had been cleared resuming our trail blazing with an added paper supply taken with curious repugnance from one of the tarpaulin bundles on the sledges when we left daylight behind.
As the glaciated floor gave place to a litter of detritus, we plainly discerned some curious, dragging tracks and once Danforth found a distinct print of a sort whose description would be only too superfluous.
The course indicated by the penguin cries was precisely what our map and compass prescribed as an approach to the more northerly tunnel mouth, and we were glad to find that a bridgeless thoroughfare on the ground and basement levels seemed open.
The tunnel, according to the chart, ought to start from the basement of a large pyramidal structure which we seemed vaguely to recall from our aerial survey as remarkably well preserved.
Along our path the single torch showed a customary profusion of carvings, but we did not pause to examine any of these.
Suddenly a bulky white shape loomed up ahead of us, and we flashed on the second torch.
It is odd how wholly this new quest had turned our minds from earlier fears of what might lurk near.
Those other ones, having left their supplies in the great circular place, must have planned to return after their scouting trip toward or into the abyss yet we had now discarded all caution concerning them as completely as if they had never existed.
This white, waddling thing was fully six feet high, yet we seemed to realize at once that it was not one of those others.
They were larger and dark, and, according to the sculptures, their motion over land surfaces was a swift, assured matter despite the queerness of their sea born tentacle equipment.
But to say that the white thing did not profoundly frighten us would be vain.
We were indeed clutched for an instant by a primitive dread almost sharper than the worst of our reasoned fears regarding those others.
Then came a flash of anticlimax as the white shape sidled into a lateral archway to our left, to join two others of its kind which had summoned it in raucous tones.
For it was only a penguin albeit of a huge, unknown species larger than the greatest of the known king penguins, and monstrous in its combined albinism and virtual eyelessness.
When we had followed the thing into the archway and turned both our torches on the indifferent and unheeding group of three, we saw that they were all eyeless albinos of the same unknown and gigantic species.
Their size reminded us of some of the archaic penguins depicted in the Old Ones' sculptures, and it did not take us long to conclude that they were descended from the same stock undoubtedly surviving through a retreat to some warmer inner region whose perpetual blackness had destroyed their pigmentation and atrophied their eyes to mere useless slits.
That their present habitat was the vast abyss we sought, was not for a moment to be doubted and this evidence of the gulf's continued warmth and habitability filled us with the most curious and subtly perturbing fancies.
We wondered, too, what had caused these three birds to venture out of their usual domain.
The state and silence of the great dead city made it clear that it had at no time been a habitual seasonal rookery, whilst the manifest indifference of the trio to our presence made it seem odd that any passing party of those others should have startled them.
Was it possible that those others had taken some aggressive notion or tried to increase their meat supply?
We doubted whether that pungent odor which the dogs had hated could cause an equal antipathy in these penguins since their ancestors had obviously lived on excellent terms with the Old Ones an amicable relationship which must have survived in the abyss below as long as any of the Old Ones remained.
Regretting in a flare up of the old spirit of pure science that we could not photograph these anomalous creatures, we shortly left them to their squawking and pushed on toward the abyss whose openness was now so positively proved to us, and whose exact direction occasional penguin tracks made clear.
Not long afterward a steep descent in a long, low, doorless, and peculiarly sculptureless corridor led us to believe that we were approaching the tunnel mouth at last.
We had passed two more penguins.
Then the corridor ended in a prodigious open space which made us gasp involuntarily a perfect inverted hemisphere, obviously deep underground, fully a hundred feet in diameter and fifty feet high, with low archways opening around all parts of the circumference but one, and that one yawning cavernously with a black, arched aperture which broke the symmetry of the vault to a height of nearly fifteen feet.
It was the entrance to the great abyss.
In this vast hemisphere, whose concave roof was impressively though decadently carved to a likeness of the primordial celestial dome, a few albino penguins waddled aliens there, but indifferent and unseeing.
The black tunnel yawned indefinitely off at a steep, descending grade, its aperture adorned with grotesquely chiseled jambs and lintel.
From that cryptical mouth we fancied a current of slightly warmer air and perhaps even a suspicion of vapor proceeded and we wondered what living entities other than penguins the limitless void below, and the contiguous honeycombings of the land and the titan mountains, might conceal.
We wondered, too, whether the trace of mountaintop smoke at first suspected by poor Lake, as well as the odd haze we had ourselves perceived around the rampart crowned peak, might not be caused by the tortuous channeled rising of some such vapor from the unfathomed regions of earth's core.
Entering the tunnel, we saw that its outline was at least at the start about fifteen feet each way sides, floor, and arched roof composed of the usual megalithic masonry.
The sides were sparsely decorated with cartouches of conventional designs in a later, decadent style and all the construction and carving were marvellously well preserved.
The floor was quite clear, except for a slight detritus bearing outgoing penguin tracks and the inward tracks of those others.
The farther one advanced, the warmer it became so that we were soon unbuttoning our heavy garments.
We wondered whether there were any actually igneous manifestations below, and whether the waters of that sunless sea were hot.
After a short distance the masonry gave place to solid rock, though the tunnel kept the same proportions and presented the same aspect of carved regularity.
Occasionally its varying grade became so steep that grooves were cut in the floor.
Several times we noted the mouths of small lateral galleries not recorded in our diagrams none of them such as to complicate the problem of our return, and all of them welcome as possible refuges in case we met unwelcome entities on their way back from the abyss.
The nameless scent of such things was very distinct.
Doubtless it was suicidally foolish to venture into that tunnel under the known conditions, but the lure of the unplumbed is stronger in certain persons than most suspect indeed, it was just such a lure which had brought us to this unearthly polar waste in the first place.
We saw several penguins as we passed along, and speculated on the distance we would have to traverse.
The carvings had led us to expect a steep downhill walk of about a mile to the abyss, but our previous wanderings had shown us that matters of scale were not wholly to be depended on.
After about a quarter of a mile that nameless scent became greatly accentuated, and we kept very careful track of the various lateral openings we passed.
There was no visible vapor as at the mouth, but this was doubtless due to the lack of contrasting cooler air.
The temperature was rapidly ascending, and we were not surprised to come upon a careless heap of material shudderingly familiar to us.
It was composed of furs and tent cloths taken from Lake's camp, and we did not pause to study the bizarre forms into which the fabrics had been slashed.
Slightly beyond this point we noticed a decided increase in the size and number of the side galleries, and concluded that the densely honeycombed region beneath the higher foothills must now have been reached.
The nameless scent was now curiously mixed with another and scarcely less offensive odor of what nature we could not guess, though we thought of decaying organisms and perhaps unknown subterrane fungi.
Then came a startling expansion of the tunnel for which the carvings had not prepared us a broadening and rising into a lofty, natural looking elliptical cavern with a level floor, some seventy five feet long and fifty broad, and with many immense side passages leading away into cryptical darkness.
Though this cavern was natural in appearance, an inspection with both torches suggested that it had been formed by the artificial destruction of several walls between adjacent honeycombings.
The walls were rough, and the high, vaulted roof was thick with stalactites but the solid rock floor had been smoothed off, and was free from all debris, detritus, or even dust to a positively abnormal extent.
Except for the avenue through which we had come, this was true of the floors of all the great galleries opening off from it and the singularity of the condition was such as to set us vainly puzzling.
The curious new fetor which had supplemented the nameless scent was excessively pungent here so much so that it destroyed all trace of the other.
Something about this whole place, with its polished and almost glistening floor, struck us as more vaguely baffling and horrible than any of the monstrous things we have previously encountered.
The regularity of the passage immediately ahead, prevented all confusion as to the right course amidst this plethora of equally great cave mouths.
Nevertheless we resolved to resume our paper trail blazing if any further complexity should develop for dust tracks, of course, could no longer be expected.
Upon resuming our direct progress we cast a beam of torchlight over the tunnel walls and stopped short in amazement at the supremely radical change which had come over the carvings in this part of the passage.
We realized, of course, the great decadence of the Old Ones' sculpture at the time of the tunneling, and had indeed noticed the inferior workmanship of the arabesques in the stretches behind us.
But now, in this deeper section beyond the cavern, there was a sudden difference wholly transcending explanation a difference in basic nature as well as in mere quality, and involving so profound and calamitous a degradation of skill that nothing in the hitherto observed rate of decline could have led one to expect it.
This new and degenerate work was coarse, bold, and wholly lacking in delicacy of detail.
It was countersunk with exaggerated depth in bands following the same general line as the sparse cartouches of the earlier sections, but the height of the reliefs did not reach the level of the general surface.
Danforth had the idea that it was a second carving a sort of palimpsest formed after the obliteration of a previous design.
In nature it was wholly decorative and conventional, and consisted of crude spirals and angles roughly following the quintile mathematical tradition of the Old Ones, yet seeming more like a parody than a perpetuation of that tradition.
Since we could not afford to spend any considerable time in study, we resumed our advance after a cursory look.
We saw and heard fewer penguins, but thought we caught a vague suspicion of an infinitely distant chorus of them somewhere deep within the earth.
The new and inexplicable odor was abominably strong, and we could detect scarcely a sign of that other nameless scent.
Puffs of visible vapor ahead bespoke increasing contrasts in temperature, and the relative nearness of the sunless sea cliffs of the great abyss.
Then, quite unexpectedly, we saw certain obstructions on the polished floor ahead obstructions which were quite definitely not penguins and turned on our second torch after making sure that the objects were quite stationary.
Still another time have I come to a place where it is very difficult to proceed.
I ought to be hardened by this stage but there are some experiences and intimations which scar too deeply to permit of healing, and leave only such added sensitiveness that memory re inspired all the original horror.
We saw, as I have said, certain obstructions on the polished floor ahead and I may add that our nostrils were assailed almost simultaneously by a very curious intensification of the strange, prevailing fetor, now quite plainly mixed with the nameless stench of those others which had gone before us.
The light of the second torch left no doubt of what the obstructions were, and we dared approach them only because we could see, even from a distance, that they were quite as past all harming power as had been the six similar specimens unearthed from the monstrous star mounded graves at poor Lake's camp.
They were, indeed, as lacking in completeness as most of those we had unearthed though it grew plain from the thick, dark green pool gathering around them that their incompleteness was of infinitely greater recency.
There seemed to be only four of them, whereas Lake's bulletins would have suggested no less than eight as forming the group which had preceded us.
To find them in this state was wholly unexpected, and we wondered what sort of monstrous struggle had occurred down here in the dark.
Penguins, attacked in a body, retaliate savagely with their beaks and our ears now made certain the existence of a rookery far beyond.
Had those others disturbed such a place and aroused murderous pursuit?
The obstructions did not suggest it, for penguin beaks against the tough tissues Lake had dissected could hardly account for the terrible damage our approaching glance was beginning to make out.
Besides, the huge blind birds we had seen appeared to be singularly peaceful.
Had there, then, been a struggle among those others, and were the absent four responsible?
If so, where were they?
Were they close at hand and likely to form an immediate menace to us?
We glanced anxiously at some of the smooth floored lateral passages as we continued our slow and frankly reluctant approach.
Whatever the conflict was, it had clearly been that which had frightened the penguins into their unaccustomed wandering.
It must, then, have arisen near that faintly heard rookery in the incalculable gulf beyond, since there were no signs that any birds had normally dwelt here.
Perhaps, we reflected, there had been a hideous running fight, with the weaker party seeking to get back to the cached sledges when their pursuers finished them.
One could picture the demonic fray between namelessly monstrous entities as it surged out of the black abyss with great clouds of frantic penguins squawking and scurrying ahead.
I say that we approached those sprawling and incomplete obstructions slowly and reluctantly.
Would to Heaven we had never approached them at all, but had run back at top speed out of that blasphemous tunnel with the greasily smooth floors and the degenerate murals aping and mocking the things they had superseded run back, before we had seen what we did see, and before our minds were burned with something which will never let us breathe easily again!
Both of our torches were turned on the prostrate objects, so that we soon realized the dominant factor in their incompleteness.
Mauled, compressed, twisted, and ruptured as they were, their chief common injury was total decapitation.
From each one the tentacled starfish head had been removed and as we drew near we saw that the manner of removal looked more like some hellish tearing or suction than like any ordinary form of cleavage.
Their noisome dark green ichor formed a large, spreading pool but its stench was half overshadowed by that newer and stranger stench, here more pungent than at any other point along our route.
Only when we had come very close to the sprawling obstructions could we trace that second, unexplainable fetor to any immediate source and the instant we did so Danforth, remembering certain very vivid sculptures of the Old Ones' history in the Permian Age one hundred and fifty million years ago, gave vent to a nerve tortured cry which echoed hysterically through that vaulted and archaic passage with the evil, palimpsest carvings.
I came only just short of echoing his cry myself for I had seen those primal sculptures, too, and had shudderingly admired the way the nameless artist had suggested that hideous slime coating found on certain incomplete and prostrate Old Ones those whom the frightful Shoggoths had characteristically slain and sucked to a ghastly headlessness in the great war of resubjugation.
They were infamous, nightmare sculptures even when telling of age old, bygone things for Shoggoths and their work ought not to be seen by human beings or portrayed by any beings.
The mad author of the Necronomicon had nervously tried to swear that none had been bred on this planet, and that only drugged dreamers had ever conceived them.
Formless protoplasm able to mock and reflect all forms and organs and processes viscous agglutinations of bubbling cells rubbery fifteen foot spheroids infinitely plastic and ductile slaves of suggestion, builders of cities more and more sullen, more and more intelligent, more and more amphibious, more and more imitative!
Great Heaven!
What madness made even those blasphemous Old Ones willing to use and to carve such things?
And now, when Danforth and I saw the freshly glistening and reflectively iridescent black slime which clung thickly to those headless bodies and stank obscenely with that new, unknown odor whose cause only a diseased fancy could envisage clung to those bodies and sparkled less voluminously on a smooth part of the accursedly resculptured wall in a series of grouped dots we understood the quality of cosmic fear to its uttermost depths.
It was not fear of those four missing others for all too well did we suspect they would do no harm again.
Poor devils!
After all, they were not evil things of their kind.
They were the men of another age and another order of being.
Nature had played a hellish jest on them as it will on any others that human madness, callousness, or cruelty may hereafter drag up in that hideously dead or sleeping polar waste and this was their tragic homecoming.
They had not been even savages for what indeed had they done?
That awful awakening in the cold of an unknown epoch perhaps an attack by the furry, frantically barking quadrupeds, and a dazed defense against them and the equally frantic white simians with the queer wrappings and paraphernalia!
Poor Lake.
Poor Gedney.
And poor Old Ones!
Scientists to the last what had they done that we would not have done in their place?
Lord, what intelligence and persistence!
What a facing of the incredible, just as those carven kinsmen and forbears had faced things only a little less incredible!
Radiates, vegetables, monstrosities, star spawn whatever they had been, they were men!
They had crossed the icy peaks on whose templed slopes they had once worshiped and roamed among the tree ferns.
They had found their dead city brooding under its curse, and had read its carven latter days as we had done.
They had tried to reach their living fellows in fabled depths of blackness they had never seen and what had they found?
All this flashed in unison through the thoughts of Danforth and me as we looked from those headless, slime coated shapes to the loathsome palimpsest sculptures and the diabolical dot groups of fresh slime on the wall beside them looked and understood what must have triumphed and survived down there in the Cyclopean water city of that nighted, penguin fringed abyss, whence even now a sinister curling mist had begun to belch pallidly as if in answer to Danforth's hysterical scream.
The shock of recognizing that monstrous slime and headlessness had frozen us into mute, motionless statues, and it is only through later conversations that we have learned of the complete identity of our thoughts at that moment.
It seemed aeons that we stood there, but actually it could not have been more than ten or fifteen seconds.
That hateful, pallid mist curled forward as if veritably driven by some remoter advancing bulk and then came a sound which upset much of what we had just decided, and in so doing broke the spell and enabled us to run like mad past squawking, confused penguins over our former trail back to the city, along ice sunken megalithic corridors to the great open circle, and up that archaic spiral ramp in a frenzied, automatic plunge for the sane outer air and light of day.
The new sound, as I have intimated, upset much that we had decided because it was what poor Lake's dissection had led us to attribute to those we had just judged dead.
It was, Danforth later told me, precisely what he had caught in infinitely muffled form when at that spot beyond the alley corner above the glacial level and it certainly had a shocking resemblance to the wind pipings we had both heard around the lofty mountain caves.
At the risk of seeming puerile I will add another thing, too, if only because of the surprising way Danforth's impression chimed with mine.
Of course, common reading is what prepared us both to make the interpretation, though Danforth has hinted at queer notions about unsuspected and forbidden sources to which Poe may have had access when writing his ''Arthur Gordon Pym'' a century ago.
It will be remembered that in that fantastic tale there is a word of unknown but terrible and prodigious significance connected with the antarctic and screamed eternally by the gigantic, spectrally snowy birds of that malign region's core.
''Tekeli li!
Tekeli li!''
That, I may admit, is exactly what we thought we heard conveyed by that sudden sound behind the advancing white mist that insidious, musical piping over a singularly wide range.
We were in full flight before three notes or syllables had been uttered, though we knew that the swiftness of the Old Ones would enable any scream roused and pursuing survivor of the slaughter to overtake us in a moment if it really wished to do so.
We had a vague hope, however, that nonaggressive conduct and a display of kindred reason might cause such a being to spare us in case of capture, if only from scientific curiosity.
After all, if such a one had nothing to fear for itself it would have no motive in harming us.
Concealment being futile at this juncture, we used our torch for a running glance behind, and perceived that the mist was thinning.
Would we see at last, a complete and living specimen of those others?
Again came that insidious musical piping ''Tekeli li!
Tekeli li!''
Then, noting that we were actually gaining on our pursuer, it occurred to us that the entity might be wounded.
We could take no chances, however, since it was very obviously approaching in answer to Danforth's scream, rather than in flight from any other entity.
The timing was too close to admit of doubt.
Of the whereabouts of that less conceivable and less mentionable nightmare that fetid, unglimpsed mountain of slime spewing protoplasm whose race had conquered the abyss and sent land pioneers to recarve and squirm through the burrows of the hills we could form no guess and it cost us a genuine pang to leave this probably crippled Old One perhaps a lone survivor to the peril of recapture and a nameless fate.
Thank Heaven we did not slacken our run.
The curling mist had thickened again, and was driving ahead with increased speed whilst the straying penguins in our rear were squawking and screaming and displaying signs of a panic really surprising in view of their relatively minor confusion when we had passed them.
Once more came that sinister, wide ranged piping ''Tekeli li!
Tekeli li!''
We had been wrong.
The thing was not wounded, but had merely paused on encountering the bodies of its fallen kindred and the hellish slime inscription above them.
We could never know what that demon message was but those burials at Lake's camp had shown how much importance the beings attached to their dead.
Our recklessly used torch now revealed ahead of us the large open cavern where various ways converged, and we were glad to be leaving those morbid palimpsest sculptures almost felt even when scarcely seen behind.
Another thought which the advent of the cave inspired was the possibility of losing our pursuer at this bewildering focus of large galleries.
There were several of the blind albino penguins in the open space, and it seemed clear that their fear of the oncoming entity was extreme to the point of unaccountability.
If at that point we dimmed our torch to the very lowest limit of traveling need, keeping it strictly in front of us, the frightened squawking motions of the huge birds in the mist might muffle our footfalls, screen our true course, and somehow set up a false lead.
Amidst the churning, spiraling fog, the littered and unglistening floor of the main tunnel beyond this point, as differing from the other morbidly polished burrows, could hardly form a highly distinguishing feature even, so far as we could conjecture, for those indicated special senses which made the Old Ones partly, though imperfectly, independent of light in emergencies.
In fact, we were somewhat apprehensive lest we go astray ourselves in our haste.
For we had, of course, decided to keep straight on toward the dead city since the consequences of loss in those unknown foothill honeycombings would be unthinkable.
The fact that we survived and emerged is sufficient proof that the thing did take a wrong gallery whilst we providentially hit on the right one.
The penguins alone could not have saved us, but in conjunction with the mist they seem to have done so.
Only a benign fate kept the curling vapors thick enough at the right moment, for they were constantly shifting and threatening to vanish.
Indeed, they did lift for a second just before we emerged from the nauseously resculptured tunnel into the cave so that we actually caught one first and only half glimpse of the oncoming entity as we cast a final, desperately fearful glance backward before dimming the torch and mixing with the penguins in the hope of dodging pursuit.
If the fate which screened us was benign, that which gave us the half glimpse was infinitely the opposite for to that flash of semivision can be traced a full half of the horror which has ever since haunted us.
Our exact motive in looking back again was perhaps no more than the immemorial instinct of the pursued to gauge the nature and course of its pursuer or perhaps it was an automatic attempt to answer a subconscious question raised by one of our senses.
In the midst of our flight, with all our faculties centered on the problem of escape, we were in no condition to observe and analyze details yet even so our latent brain cells must have wondered at the message brought them by our nostrils.
Afterward, we realized what it was that our retreat from the fetid slime coating on those headless obstructions, and the coincident approach of the pursuing entity, had not brought us the exchange of stenches which logic called for.
In the neighborhood of the prostrate things that new and lately unexplainable fetor had been wholly dominant but by this time it ought to have largely given place to the nameless stench associated with those others.
This it had not done for instead, the newer and less bearable smell was now virtually undiluted, and growing more and more poisonously insistent each second.
So we glanced back simultaneously, it would appear though no doubt the incipient motion of one prompted the imitation of the other.
As we did so we flashed both torches full strength at the momentarily thinned mist either from sheer primitive anxiety to see all we could, or in a less primitive but equally unconscious effort to dazzle the entity before we dimmed our light and dodged among the penguins of the labyrinth center ahead.
Unhappy act!
Not Orpheus himself, or Lot's wife, paid much more dearly for a backward glance.
And again came that shocking, wide ranged piping ''Tekeli li!
Tekeli li!''
Danforth was totally unstrung, and the first thing I remember of the rest of the journey was hearing him light headedly chant a hysterical formula in which I alone of mankind could have found anything but insane irrelevance.
It reverberated in falsetto echoes among the squawks of the penguins reverberated through the vaulting ahead, and thank Heaven through the now empty vaultings behind.
He could not have begun it at once else we would not have been alive and blindly racing.
I shudder to think of what a shade of difference in his nervous reactions might have brought.
''South Station Under Washington Under Park Street Under Kendall Central Harvard  '' The poor fellow was chanting the familiar stations of the Boston Cambridge tunnel that burrowed through our peaceful native soil thousands of miles away in New England, yet to me the ritual had neither irrelevance nor home feeling.
It had only horror, because I knew unerringly the monstrous, nefandous analogy that had suggested it.
We had expected, upon looking back, to see a terrible and incredible moving entity if the mists were thin enough but of that entity we had formed a clear idea.
What we did see for the mists were indeed all too malignly thinned was something altogether different, and immeasurably more hideous and detestable.
It was the utter, objective embodiment of the fantastic novelist's 'thing that should not be' and its nearest comprehensible analogue is a vast, onrushing subway train as one sees it from a station platform the great black front looming colossally out of infinite subterraneous distance, constellated with strangely colored lights and filling the prodigious burrow.
But we were not on a station platform.
We were on the track ahead as the nightmare, plastic column of fetid black iridescence oozed tightly onward through its fifteen foot sinus, gathering unholy speed and driving before it a spiral, rethickening cloud of the pallid abyss vapor.
It was a terrible, indescribable thing, vaster than any subway train a shapeless congeries of protoplasmic bubbles, faintly self luminous, and with myriads of temporary eyes forming and unforming as pustules of greenish light all over the tunnel filling front that bore down upon us, crushing the frantic penguins and slithering over the glistening floor that it and its kind had swept so evilly free of all litter.
Still came that eldritch, mocking cry ''Tekeli li!
Tekeli li!''
And at last we remembered that the demonic Shoggoths given life, though, and plastic organ patterns solely by the Old Ones, and having no language save that which the dot groups expressed had likewise no voice save the imitated accents of their bygone masters.
Danforth and I have recollections of emerging into the great sculptured hemisphere and of threading our back trail through the Cyclopean rooms and corridors of the dead city yet these are purely dream fragments involving no memory of volition, details, or physical exertion.
There was something vaguely appropriate about our departure from those buried epochs for as we wound our panting way up the sixty foot cylinder of primal masonry we glimpsed beside us a continuous procession of heroic sculptures in the dead race's early and undecayed technique a farewell from the Old Ones, written fifty million years ago.
Finally, scrambling out at the top, we found ourselves on a great mound of tumbled blocks, with the curved walls of higher stonework rising westward, and the brooding peaks of the great mountains showing beyond the more crumbled structures toward the east.
The sky above was a churning and opalescent mass of tenuous ice vapors, and the cold clutched at our vitals.
In less than a quarter of an hour we had found the steep grade to the foothills the probable ancient terrace by which we had descended, and could see the dark bulk of our great plane amidst the sparse ruins on the rising slope ahead.
Halfway uphill toward our goal we paused for a momentary breathing spell, and turned to look again at the fantastic tangle of incredible stone shapes below us once more outlined mystically against an unknown west.
As we did so we saw that the sky beyond had lost its morning haziness the restless ice vapors having moved up to the zenith, where their mocking outlines seemed on the point of settling into some bizarre pattern which they feared to make quite definite or conclusive.
There now lay revealed on the ultimate white horizon behind the grotesque city a dim, elfin line of pinnacled violet whose needle pointed heights loomed dreamlike against the beckoning rose color of the western sky.
Up toward this shimmering rim sloped the ancient table land, the depressed course of the bygone river traversing it as an irregular ribbon of shadow.
For a second we gasped in admiration of the scene's unearthly cosmic beauty, and then vague horror began to creep into our souls.
For this far violet line could be nothing else than the terrible mountains of the forbidden land highest of earth's peaks and focus of earth's evil harborers of nameless horrors and Archaean secrets shunned and prayed to by those who feared to carve their meaning untrodden by any living thing of earth, but visited by the sinister lightnings and sending strange beams across the plains in the polar night.
If the sculptured maps and pictures in that prehuman city had told truly, these cryptic violet mountains could not be much less than three hundred miles away yet none the less sharply did their dim elfin essence jut above that remote and snowy rim, like the serrated edge of a monstrous alien planet about to rise into unaccustomed heavens.
Looking at them, I thought nervously of certain sculptured hints of what the great bygone river had washed down into the city from their accursed sloping and wondered how much sense and how much folly had lain in the fears of those Old Ones who carved them so reticently.
I recalled how their northerly end must come near the coast at Queen Mary Land, where even at that moment Sir Douglas Mawson's expedition was doubtless working less than a thousand miles away and hoped that no evil fate would give Sir Douglas and his men a glimpse of what might lie beyond the protecting coastal range.
Such thoughts formed a measure of my overwrought condition at the time and Danforth seemed to be even worse.
Yet before we had passed the great star shaped ruin and reached our plane our fears had become transferred to the lesser, but vast enough, range whose re crossing lay ahead of us.
From these foothills the black, ruin crusted slopes reared up starkly and hideously against the east, again reminding us of those strange Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich and when we thought of the damnable honeycombings inside them, and of the frightful amorphous entities that might have pushed their fetidly squirming sway even to the topmost hollow pinnacles, we could not face without panic the prospect of again sailing by those suggestive skyward cave mouths where the wind made sounds like an evil musical piping over a wide range.
To make matters worse, we saw distinct traces of local mist around several of the summits as poor Lake must have done when he made that early mistake about volcanism and thought shiveringly of that kindred mist from which we had just escaped of that, and of the blasphemous, horror fostering abyss whence all such vapors came.
All was well with the plane, and we clumsily hauled on our heavy flying furs.
Danforth got the engine started without trouble, and we made a very smooth take off over the nightmare city.
At a very high level there must have been great disturbance, since the ice dust clouds of the zenith were doing all sorts of fantastic things but at twenty four thousand feet, the height we needed for the pass, we found navigation quite practicable.
As we drew close to the jutting peaks the wind's strange piping again became manifest, and I could see Danforth's hands trembling at the controls.
Rank amateur though I was, I thought at that moment that I might be a better navigator than he in effecting the dangerous crossing between pinnacles and when I made motions to change seats and take over his duties he did not protest.
I tried to keep all my skill and self possession about me, and stared at the sector of reddish farther sky betwixt the walls of the pass.
But Danforth, released from his piloting and keyed up to a dangerous nervous pitch, could not keep quiet.
I felt him turning and wriggling about as he looked back at the terrible receding city, ahead at the cave riddled, cube barnacled peaks, sidewise at the bleak sea of snowy, rampart strown foothills, and upward at the seething, grotesquely clouded sky.
It was then, just as I was trying to steer safely through the pass, that his mad shrieking brought us so close to disaster, by shattering my tight hold on myself and causing me to fumble helplessly with the controls for a moment.
A second afterward my resolution triumphed and we made the crossing safely  Yet I am afraid that Danforth will never be the same again.
I have said that Danforth refused to tell me what final horror made him scream out so insanely a horror which, I feel sadly sure, is mainly responsible for his present breakdown.
We had snatches of shouted conversation above the wind's piping and the engine's buzzing as we reached the safe side of the range and swooped slowly down toward the camp, but that had mostly to do with the pledges of secrecy we had made as we prepared to leave the nightmare city.
All that Danforth has ever hinted is that the final horror was a mirage.
It was not, he declares, anything connected with the cubes and caves of those echoing, vaporous, wormily honeycombed mountains of madness which we crossed but a single fantastic, demonic glimpse, among the churning westward zenith clouds, of what lay back of those other violet westward mountains which the Old Ones had shunned and feared.
He has on rare occasions whispered disjointed and irresponsible things about ''the black pit,'' ''the carven rim,'' ''the proto Shoggoths,'' ''the windowless solids with five dimensions,'' ''the nameless cylinders,'' ''the elder pharos,'' ''Yog Sothoth,'' ''the primal white jelly,'' ''the color out of space,'' ''the wings,'' ''the eyes in darkness,'' ''the moon ladder,'' ''the original, the eternal, the undying,'' and other bizarre conceptions but when he is fully himself he repudiates all this and attributes it to his curious and macabre reading of earlier years.
Danforth, indeed, is known to be among the few who have ever dared go completely through that worm riddled copy of the Necronomicon kept under lock and key in the college library.
The higher sky, as we crossed the range, was surely vaporous and disturbed enough and although I did not see the zenith I can well imagine that its swirls of ice dust may have taken strange forms.
Imagination, knowing how vividly distant scenes can sometimes be reflected, refracted, and magnified by such layers of restless cloud, might easily have supplied the rest and, of course, Danforth did not hint any of these specific horrors till after his memory had had a chance to draw on his bygone reading.
He could never have seen so much in one instantaneous glance.
At the time, his shrieks were confined to the repetition of a single, mad word of all too obvious source ''Tekeli li!
Tekeli li!''
West of Arkham the hills rise wild, and there are valleys with deep woods that no axe has ever cut.
There are dark narrow glens where the trees slope fantastically, and where thin brooklets trickle without ever having caught the glint of sunlight.
On the gentler slopes there are farms, ancient and rocky, with squat, moss coated cottages brooding eternally over old New England secrets in the lee of great ledges but these are all vacant now, the wide chimneys crumbling and the shingled sides bulging perilously beneath low gambrel roofs.
The old folk have gone away, and foreigners do not like to live there.
French Canadians have tried it, Italians have tried it, and the Poles have come and departed.
It is not because of anything that can be seen or heard or handled, but because of something that is imagined.
The place is not good for imagination, and does not bring restful dreams at night.
It must be this which keeps the foreigners away, for old Ammi Pierce has never told them of anything he recalls from the strange days.
Ammi, whose head has been a little queer for years, is the only one who still remains, or who ever talks of the strange days and he dares to do this because his house is so near the open fields and the travelled roads around Arkham.
There was once a road over the hills and through the valleys, that ran straight where the blasted heath is now but people ceased to use it and a new road was laid curving far toward the south.
Traces of the old one can still be found amidst the weeds of a returning wilderness, and some of them will doubtless linger even when half the hollows are flooded for the new reservoir.
Then the dark woods will be cut down and the blasted heath will slumber far below blue waters whose surface will mirror the sky and ripple in the sun.
And the secrets of the strange days will be one with the deep's secrets one with the hidden lore of old ocean, and all the mystery of primal earth.
When I went into the hills and vales to survey for the new reservoir they told me the place was evil.
They told me this in Arkham, and because that is a very old town full of witch legends I thought the evil must be something which grandmas had whispered to children through centuries.
The name ''blasted heath'' seemed to me very odd and theatrical, and I wondered how it had come into the folklore of a Puritan people.
Then I saw that dark westward tangle of glens and slopes for myself, and ceased to wonder at anything besides its own elder mystery.
It was morning when I saw it, but shadow lurked always there.
The trees grew too thickly, and their trunks were too big for any healthy New England wood.
There was too much silence in the dim alleys between them, and the floor was too soft with the dank moss and mattings of infinite years of decay.
In the open spaces, mostly along the line of the old road, there were little hillside farms sometimes with all the buildings standing, sometimes with only one or two, and sometimes with only a lone chimney or fast filling cellar.
Weeds and briers reigned, and furtive wild things rustled in the undergrowth.
Upon everything was a haze of restlessness and oppression a touch of the unreal and the grotesque, as if some vital element of perspective or chiaroscuro were awry.
I did not wonder that the foreigners would not stay, for this was no region to sleep in.
It was too much like a landscape of Salvator Rosa too much like some forbidden woodcut in a tale of terror.
But even all this was not so bad as the blasted heath.
I knew it the moment I came upon it at the bottom of a spacious valley for no other name could fit such thing, or any other thing fit such a name.
It was as if the poet had coined the phrase from having seen this one particular region.
It must, I thought as I viewed it, be the outcome of a fire but why had nothing new ever grown over those five acres of grey desolation that sprawled open to the sky like a great spot eaten by acid in the woods and fields?
It lay largely to the north of the ancient road line, but encroached a little on the other side.
I felt an odd reluctance about approaching, and did so at last only because my business took me through and past it.
There was no vegetation of any kind on that broad expanse, but only a fine grey dust or ash which no wind seemed ever to blow about.
The trees near it were sickly and stunted, and many dead trunks stood or lay rotting at the rim.
As I walked hurriedly by I saw the tumbled bricks and stones of an old chimney and cellar on my right, and the yawning black maw of an abandoned well whose stagnant vapours played strange tricks with the hues of the sunlight.
Even the long, dark woodland climb beyond seemed welcome in contrast, and I marvelled no more at the frightened whispers of Arkham people.
There had been no house or ruin near even in the old days the place must have been lonely and remote.
And at twilight, dreading to repass that ominous spot, I walked circuitously back to the town by the curving road on the south.
I vaguely wished some clouds would gather, for an odd timidity about the deep skyey voids above had crept into my soul.
In the evening I asked old people in Arkham about the blasted heath, and what was meant by that phrase ''strange days'' which so many evasively muttered.
I could not, however, get any good answers, except that all the mystery was much more recent than I had dreamed.
It was not a matter of old legendry at all, but something within the lifetime of those who spoke.
It had happened in the 'eighties, and a family had disappeared or was killed.
Speakers would not be exact and because they all told me to pay no attention to old Ammi Pierce's crazy tales, I sought him out the next morning, having heard that he lived alone in the ancient tottering cottage where the trees first begin to get very thick.
It was a fearsomely ancient place, and had begun to exude the faint miasmal odour which clings about houses that have stood too long.
Only with persistent knocking could I rouse the aged man, and when he shuffled timidly to the door I could tell he was not glad to see me.
He was not so feeble as I had expected but his eyes drooped in a curious way, and his unkempt clothing and white beard made him seem very worn and dismal.
Not knowing just how he could best be launched on his tales, I feigned a matter of business told him of my surveying, and asked vague questions about the district.
He was far brighter and more educated than I had been led to think, and before I knew it had grasped quite as much of the subject as any man I had talked with in Arkham.
He was not like other rustics I had known in the sections where reservoirs were to be.
From him there were no protests at the miles of old wood and farmland to be blotted out, though perhaps there would have been had not his home lain outside the bounds of the future lake.
Relief was all that he showed relief at the doom of the dark ancient valleys through which he had roamed all his life.
They were better under water now better under water since the strange days.
And with this opening his husky voice sank low, while his body leaned forward and his right forefinger began to point shakily and impressively.
It was then that I heard the story, and as the rambling voice scraped and whispered on I shivered again and again despite the summer day.
Often I had to recall the speaker from ramblings, piece out scientific points which he knew only by a fading parrot memory of professors' talk, or bridge over gaps, where his sense of logic and continuity broke down.
When he was done I did not wonder that his mind had snapped a trifle, or that the folk of Arkham would not speak much of the blasted heath.
I hurried back before sunset to my hotel, unwilling to have the stars come out above me in the open and the next day returned to Boston to give up my position.
I could not go into that dim chaos of old forest and slope again, or face another time that grey blasted heath where the black well yawned deep beside the tumbled bricks and stones.
The reservoir will soon be built now, and all those elder secrets will lie safe forever under watery fathoms.
But even then I do not believe I would like to visit that country by night at least not when the sinister stars are out and nothing could bribe me to drink the new city water of Arkham.
It all began, old Ammi said, with the meteorite.
Before that time there had been no wild legends at all since the witch trials, and even then these western woods were not feared half so much as the small island in the Miskatonic where the devil held court beside a curious stone altar older than the Indians.
These were not haunted woods, and their fantastic dusk was never terrible till the strange days.
Then there had come that white noontide cloud, that string of explosions in the air, and that pillar of smoke from the valley far in the wood.
And by night all Arkham had heard of the great rock that fell out of the sky and bedded itself in the ground beside the well at the Nahum Gardner place.
That was the house which had stood where the blasted heath was to come the trim white Nahum Gardner house amidst its fertile gardens and orchards.
Nahum had come to town to tell people about the stone, and had dropped in at Ammi Pierce's on the way.
Ammi was forty then, and all the queer things were fixed very strongly in his mind.
He and his wife had gone with the three professors from Miskatonic University who hastened out the next morning to see the weird visitor from unknown stellar space, and had wondered why Nahum had called it so large the day before.
It had shrunk, Nahum said as he pointed out the big brownish mound above the ripped earth and charred grass near the archaic well sweep in his front yard but the wise men answered that stones do not shrink.
Its heat lingered persistently, and Nahum declared it had glowed faintly in the night.
The professors tried it with a geologist's hammer and found it was oddly soft.
It was, in truth, so soft as to be almost plastic and they gouged rather than chipped a specimen to take back to the college for testing.
They took it in an old pail borrowed from Nahum's kitchen, for even the small piece refused to grow cool.
On the trip back they stopped at Ammi's to rest, and seemed thoughtful when Mrs. Pierce remarked that the fragment was growing smaller and burning the bottom of the pail.
Truly, it was not large, but perhaps they had taken less than they thought.
The day after that all this was in June of '82 the professors had trooped out again in a great excitement.
As they passed Ammi's they told him what queer things the specimen had done, and how it had faded wholly away when they put it in a glass beaker.
The beaker had gone, too, and the wise men talked of the strange stone's affinity for silicon.
It had acted quite unbelievably in that well ordered laboratory doing nothing at all and showing no occluded gases when heated on charcoal, being wholly negative in the borax bead, and soon proving itself absolutely non volatile at any producible temperature, including that of the oxy hydrogen blowpipe.
On an anvil it appeared highly malleable, and in the dark its luminosity was very marked.
Stubbornly refusing to grow cool, it soon had the college in a state of real excitement and when upon heating before the spectroscope it displayed shining bands unlike any known colours of the normal spectrum there was much breathless talk of new elements, bizarre optical properties, and other things which puzzled men of science are wont to say when faced by the unknown.
Hot as it was, they tested it in a crucible with all the proper reagents.
Water did nothing.
Hydrochloric acid was the same.
Nitric acid and even aqua regia merely hissed and spattered against its torrid invulnerability.
Ammi had difficulty in recalling all these things, but recognized some solvents as I mentioned them in the usual order of use.
There were ammonia and caustic soda, alcohol and ether, nauseous carbon disulphide and a dozen others but although the weight grew steadily less as time passed, and the fragment seemed to be slightly cooling, there was no change in the solvents to show that they had attacked the substance at all.
It was a metal, though, beyond a doubt.
It was magnetic, for one thing and after its immersion in the acid solvents there seemed to be faint traces of the Widmanstatten figures found on meteoric iron.
When the cooling had grown very considerable, the testing was carried on in glass and it was in a glass beaker that they left all the chips made of the original fragment during the work.
The next morning both chips and beaker were gone without trace, and only a charred spot marked the place on the wooden shelf where they had been.
All this the professors told Ammi as they paused at his door, and once more he went with them to see the stony messenger from the stars, though this time his wife did not accompany him.
It had now most certainly shrunk, and even the sober professors could not doubt the truth of what they saw.
All around the dwindling brown lump near the well was a vacant space, except where the earth had caved in and whereas it had been a good seven feet across the day before, it was now scarcely five.
It was still hot, and the sages studied its surface curiously as they detached another and larger piece with hammer and chisel.
They gouged deeply this time, and as they pried away the smaller mass they saw that the core of the thing was not quite homogeneous.
They had uncovered what seemed to be the side of a large coloured globule embedded in the substance.
The colour, which resembled some of the bands in the meteor's strange spectrum, was almost impossible to describe and it was only by analogy that they called it colour at all.
Its texture was glossy, and upon tapping it appeared to promise both brittleness and hollowness.
One of the professors gave it a smart blow with a hammer, and it burst with a nervous little pop.
Nothing was emitted, and all trace of the thing vanished with the puncturing.
It left behind a hollow spherical space about three inches across, and all thought it probable that others would be discovered as the enclosing substance wasted away.
Conjecture was vain so after a futile attempt to find additional globules by drilling, the seekers left again with their new specimen which proved, however, as baffling in the laboratory as its predecessor.
Aside from being almost plastic, having heat, magnetism, and slight luminosity, cooling slightly in powerful acids, possessing an unknown spectrum, wasting away in air, and attacking silicon compounds with mutual destruction as a result, it presented no identifying features whatsoever and at the end of the tests the college scientists were forced to own that they could not place it.
It was nothing of this earth, but a piece of the great outside and as such dowered with outside properties and obedient to outside laws.
That night there was a thunderstorm, and when the professors went out to Nahum's the next day they met with a bitter disappointment.
The stone, magnetic as it had been, must have had some peculiar electrical property for it had ''drawn the lightning,'' as Nahum said, with a singular persistence.
Six times within an hour the farmer saw the lightning strike the furrow in the front yard, and when the storm was over nothing remained but a ragged pit by the ancient well sweep, half chocked with caved in earth.
Digging had borne no fruit, and the scientists verified the fact of the utter vanishment.
The failure was total so that nothing was left to do but go back to the laboratory and test again the disappearing fragment left carefully cased in lead.
That fragment lasted a week, at the end of which nothing of value had been learned of it.
When it had gone, no residue was left behind, and in time the professors felt scarcely sure they had indeed seen with waking eyes that cryptic vestige of the fathomless gulfs outside that lone, weird message from other universes and other realms of matter, force, and entity.
As was natural, the Arkham papers made much of the incident with its collegiate sponsoring, and sent reporters to talk with Nahum Gardner and his family.
At least one Boston daily also sent a scribe, and Nahum quickly became a kind of local celebrity.
He was a lean, genial person of about fifty, living with his wife and three sons on the pleasant farmstead in the valley.
He and Ammi exchanged visits frequently, as did their wives and Ammi had nothing but praise for him after all these years.
He seemed slightly proud of the notice his place had attracted, and talked often of the meteorite in the succeeding weeks.
That July and August were hot and Nahum worked hard at his haying in the ten acre pasture across Chapman's Brook his rattling wain wearing deep ruts in the shadowy lanes between.
The labour tired him more than it had in other years, and he felt that age was beginning to tell on him.
Then fell the time of fruit and harvest.
The pears and apples slowly ripened, and Nahum vowed that his orchards were prospering as never before.
The fruit was growing to phenomenal size and unwonted gloss, and in such abundance that extra barrels were ordered to handle the future crop.
But with the ripening came sore disappointment, for of all that gorgeous array of specious lusciousness not one single jot was fit to eat.
Into the fine flavour of the pears and apples had crept a stealthy bitterness and sickishness, so that even the smallest of bites induced a lasting disgust.
It was the same with the melons and tomatoes, and Nahum sadly saw that his entire crop was lost.
Quick to connect events, he declared that the meteorite had poisoned the soil, and thanked Heaven that most of the other crops were in the upland lot along the road.
Winter came early, and was very cold.
Ammi saw Nahum less often than usual, and observed that he had begun to look worried.
The rest of his family too, seemed to have grown taciturn and were far from steady in their churchgoing or their attendance at the various social events of the countryside.
For this reserve or melancholy no cause could be found, though all the household confessed now and then to poorer health and a feeling of vague disquiet.
Nahum himself gave the most definite statement of anyone when he said he was disturbed about certain footprints in the snow.
They were the usual winter prints of red squirrels, white rabbits, and foxes, but the brooding farmer professed to see something not quite right about their nature and arrangement.
He was never specific, but appeared to think that they were not as characteristic of the anatomy and habits of squirrels and rabbits and foxes as they ought to be.
Ammi listened without interest to this talk until one night when he drove past Nahum's house in his sleigh on the way back from Clark's Corners.
There had been a moon, and a rabbit had run across the road and the leaps of that rabbit were longer than either Ammi or his horse liked.
The latter, indeed, had almost run away when brought up by a firm rein.
Thereafter Ammi gave Nahum's tales more respect, and wondered why the Gardner dogs seemed so cowed and quivering every morning.
They had, it developed, nearly lost the spirit to bark.
In February the McGregor boys from Meadow Hill were out shooting woodchucks, and not far from the Gardner place bagged a very peculiar specimen.
The proportions of its body seemed slightly altered in a queer way impossible to describe, while its face had taken on an expression which no one ever saw in a woodchuck before.
The boys were genuinely frightened, and threw the thing away at once, so that only their grotesque tales of it ever reached the people of the countryside.
But the shying of horses near Nahum's house had now become an acknowledged thing, and all the basis for a cycle of whispered legend was fast taking form.
People vowed that the snow melted faster around Nahum's than it did anywhere else, and early in March there was an awed discussion in Potter's general store at Clark's Corners.
Stephen Rice had driven past Gardner's in the morning, and had noticed the skunk cabbages coming up through the mud by the woods across the road.
Never were things of such size seen before, and they held strange colours that could not be put into any words.
Their shapes were monstrous, and the horse had snorted at an odour which struck Stephen as wholly unprecedented.
That afternoon several persons drove past to see the abnormal growth, and all agreed that plants of that kind ought never to sprout in a healthy world.
The bad fruit of the fall before was freely mentioned, and it went from mouth to mouth that there was poison in Nahum's ground.
Of course it was the meteorite and remembering how strange the men from the college had found that stone to be, several farmers spoke about the matter to them.
One day they paid Nahum a visit but having no love of wild tales and folklore were very conservative in what they inferred.
The plants were certainly odd, but all skunk cabbages are more or less odd in shape and hue.
Perhaps some mineral element from the stone had entered the soil, but it would soon be washed away.
And as for the footprints and frightened horses of course this was mere country talk which such a phenomenon as the aerolite would be certain to start.
There was really nothing for serious men to do in cases of wild gossip, for superstitious rustics will say and believe anything.
And so all through the strange days the professors stayed away in contempt.
Only one of them, when given two phials of dust for analysis in a police job over a year and a half later, recalled that the queer colour of that skunk cabbage had been very like one of the anomalous bands of light shown by the meteor fragment in the college spectroscope, and like the brittle globule found imbedded in the stone from the abyss.
The samples in this analysis case gave the same odd bands at first, though later they lost the property.
The trees budded prematurely around Nahum's, and at night they swayed ominously in the wind.
Nahum's second son Thaddeus, a lad of fifteen, swore that they swayed also when there was no wind but even the gossips would not credit this.
Certainly, however, restlessness was in the air.
The entire Gardner family developed the habit of stealthy listening, though not for any sound which they could consciously name.
The listening was, indeed, rather a product of moments when consciousness seemed half to slip away.
Unfortunately such moments increased week by week, till it became common speech that ''something was wrong with all Nahum's folks.''
When the early saxifrage came out it had another strange colour not quite like that of the skunk cabbage, but plainly related and equally unknown to anyone who saw it.
Nahum took some blossoms to Arkham and showed them to the editor of the Gazette, but that dignitary did no more than write a humorous article about them, in which the dark fears of rustics were held up to polite ridicule.
It was a mistake of Nahum's to tell a stolid city man about the way the great, overgrown mourning cloak butterflies behaved in connection with these saxifrages.
April brought a kind of madness to the country folk, and began that disuse of the road past Nahum's which led to its ultimate abandonment.
It was next the vegetation.
All the orchard trees blossomed forth in strange colours, and through the stony soil of the yard and adjacent pasturage there sprang up a bizarre growth which only a botanist could connect with the proper flora of the region.
No sane wholesome colours were anywhere to be seen except in the green grass and leafage but everywhere were those hectic and prismatic variants of some diseased, underlying primary tone without a place among the known tints of earth.
The ''Dutchman's breeches'' became a thing of sinister menace, and the bloodroots grew insolent in their chromatic perversion.
Ammi and the Gardners thought that most of the colours had a sort of haunting familiarity, and decided that they reminded one of the brittle globule in the meteor.
Nahum ploughed and sowed the ten acre pasture and the upland lot, but did nothing with the land around the house.
He knew it would be of no use, and hoped that the summer's strange growths would draw all the poison from the soil.
He was prepared for almost anything now, and had grown used to the sense of something near him waiting to be heard.
The shunning of his house by neighbours told on him, of course but it told on his wife more.
The boys were better off, being at school each day but they could not help being frightened by the gossip.
Thaddeus, an especially sensitive youth, suffered the most.
In May the insects came, and Nahum's place became a nightmare of buzzing and crawling.
Most of the creatures seemed not quite usual in their aspects and motions, and their nocturnal habits contradicted all former experience.
The Gardners took to watching at night watching in all directions at random for something they could not tell what.
It was then that they all owned that Thaddeus had been right about the trees.
Mrs. Gardner was the next to see it from the window as she watched the swollen boughs of a maple against a moonlit sky.
The boughs surely moved, and there was no wind.
It must be the sap.
Strangeness had come into everything growing now.
Yet it was none of Nahum's family at all who made the next discovery.
Familiarity had dulled them, and what they could not see was glimpsed by a timid windmill salesman from Bolton who drove by one night in ignorance of the country legends.
What he told in Arkham was given a short paragraph in the Gazette and it was there that all the farmers, Nahum included, saw it first.
The night had been dark and the buggy lamps faint, but around a farm in the valley which everyone knew from the account must be Nahum's, the darkness had been less thick.
A dim though distinct luminosity seemed to inhere in all the vegetation, grass, leaves, and blossoms alike, while at one moment a detached piece of the phosphorescence appeared to stir furtively in the yard near the barn.
The grass had so far seemed untouched, and the cows were freely pastured in the lot near the house, but toward the end of May the milk began to be bad.
Then Nahum had the cows driven to the uplands, after which this trouble ceased.
Not long after this the change in grass and leaves became apparent to the eye.
All the verdure was going grey, and was developing a highly singular quality of brittleness.
Ammi was now the only person who ever visited the place, and his visits were becoming fewer and fewer.
When school closed the Gardners were virtually cut off from the world, and sometimes let Ammi do their errands in town.
They were failing curiously both physically and mentally, and no one was surprised when the news of Mrs. Gardner's madness stole around.
It happened in June, about the anniversary of the meteor's fall, and the poor woman screamed about things in the air which she could not describe.
In her raving there was not a single specific noun, but only verbs and pronouns.
Things moved and changed and fluttered, and ears tingled to impulses which were not wholly sounds.
Something was taken away she was being drained of something something was fastening itself on her that ought not to be someone must make it keep off nothing was ever still in the night the walls and windows shifted.
Nahum did not send her to the county asylum, but let her wander about the house as long as she was harmless to herself and others.
Even when her expression changed he did nothing.
But when the boys grew afraid of her, and Thaddeus nearly fainted at the way she made faces at him, he decided to keep her locked in the attic.
By July she had ceased to speak and crawled on all fours, and before that month was over Nahum got the mad notion that she was slightly luminous in the dark, as he now clearly saw was the case with the nearby vegetation.
It was a little before this that the horses had stampeded.
Something had aroused them in the night, and their neighing and kicking in their stalls had been terrible.
There seemed virtually nothing to do to calm them, and when Nahum opened the stable door they all bolted out like frightened woodland deer.
It took a week to track all four, and when found they were seen to be quite useless and unmanageable.
Something had snapped in their brains, and each one had to be shot for its own good.
Nahum borrowed a horse from Ammi for his haying, but found it would not approach the barn.
It shied, balked, and whinnied, and in the end he could do nothing but drive it into the yard while the men used their own strength to get the heavy wagon near enough the hayloft for convenient pitching.
And all the while the vegetation was turning grey and brittle.
Even the flowers whose hues had been so strange were graying now, and the fruit was coming out grey and dwarfed and tasteless.
The asters and goldenrod bloomed grey and distorted, and the roses and zinnias and hollyhocks in the front yard were such blasphemous looking things that Nahum's oldest boy Zenas cut them down.
The strangely puffed insects died about that time, even the bees that had left their hives and taken to the woods.
By September all the vegetation was fast crumbling to a greyish powder, and Nahum feared that the trees would die before the poison was out of the soil.
His wife now had spells of terrific screaming, and he and the boys were in a constant state of nervous tension.
They shunned people now, and when school opened the boys did not go.
But it was Ammi, on one of his rare visits, who first realized that the well water was no longer good.
It had an evil taste that was not exactly fetid nor exactly salty, and Ammi advised his friend to dig another well on higher ground to use till the soil was good again.
Nahum, however, ignored the warning, for he had by that time become calloused to strange and unpleasant things.
He and the boys continued to use the tainted supply, drinking it as listlessly and mechanically as they ate their meagre and ill cooked meals and did their thankless and monotonous chores through the aimless days.
There was something of stolid resignation about them all, as if they walked half in another world between lines of nameless guards to a certain and familiar doom.
Thaddeus went mad in September after a visit to the well.
He had gone with a pail and had come back empty handed, shrieking and waving his arms, and sometimes lapsing into an inane titter or a whisper about ''the moving colours down there.''
Two in one family was pretty bad, but Nahum was very brave about it.
He let the boy run about for a week until he began stumbling and hurting himself, and then he shut him in an attic room across the hall from his mother's.
The way they screamed at each other from behind their locked doors was very terrible, especially to little Merwin, who fancied they talked in some terrible language that was not of earth.
Merwin was getting frightfully imaginative, and his restlessness was worse after the shutting away of the brother who had been his greatest playmate.
Almost at the same time the mortality among the livestock commenced.
Poultry turned greyish and died very quickly, their meat being found dry and noisome upon cutting.
Hogs grew inordinately fat, then suddenly began to undergo loathsome changes which no one could explain.
Their meat was of course useless, and Nahum was at his wit's end.
No rural veterinary would approach his place, and the city veterinary from Arkham was openly baffled.
The swine began growing grey and brittle and falling to pieces before they died, and their eyes and muzzles developed singular alterations.
It was very inexplicable, for they had never been fed from the tainted vegetation.
Then something struck the cows.
Certain areas or sometimes the whole body would be uncannily shrivelled or compressed, and atrocious collapses or disintegrations were common.
In the last stages and death was always the result there would be a greying and turning brittle like that which beset the hogs.
There could be no question of poison, for all the cases occurred in a locked and undisturbed barn.
No bites of prowling things could have brought the virus, for what live beast of earth can pass through solid obstacles?
It must be only natural disease yet what disease could wreak such results was beyond any mind's guessing.
When the harvest came there was not an animal surviving on the place, for the stock and poultry were dead and the dogs had run away.
These dogs, three in number, had all vanished one night and were never heard of again.
The five cats had left some time before, but their going was scarcely noticed since there now seemed to be no mice, and only Mrs. Gardner had made pets of the graceful felines.
On the nineteenth of October Nahum staggered into Ammi's house with hideous news.
The death had come to poor Thaddeus in his attic room, and it had come in a way which could not be told.
Nahum had dug a grave in the railed family plot behind the farm, and had put therein what he found.
There could have been nothing from outside, for the small barred window and locked door were intact but it was much as it had been in the barn.
Ammi and his wife consoled the stricken man as best they could, but shuddered as they did so.
Stark terror seemed to cling round the Gardners and all they touched, and the very presence of one in the house was a breath from regions unnamed and unnameable.
Ammi accompanied Nahum home with the greatest reluctance, and did what he might to calm the hysterical sobbing of little Merwin.
Zenas needed no calming.
He had come of late to do nothing but stare into space and obey what his father told him and Ammi thought that his fate was very merciful.
Now and then Merwin's screams were answered faintly from the attic, and in response to an inquiring look Nahum said that his wife was getting very feeble.
When night approached, Ammi managed to get away for not even friendship could make him stay in that spot when the faint glow of the vegetation began and the trees may or may not have swayed without wind.
It was really lucky for Ammi that he was not more imaginative.
Even as things were, his mind was bent ever so slightly but had he been able to connect and reflect upon all the portents around him he must inevitably have turned a total maniac.
In the twilight he hastened home, the screams of the mad woman and the nervous child ringing horrible in his ears.
Three days later Nahum burst into Ammi's kitchen in the early morning, and in the absence of his host stammered out a desperate tale once more, while Mrs. Pierce listened in a clutching fright.
It was little Merwin this time.
He was gone.
He had gone out late at night with a lantern and pail for water, and had never come back.
He'd been going to pieces for days, and hardly knew what he was about.
Screamed at everything.
There had been a frantic shriek from the yard then, but before the father could get to the door the boy was gone.
There was no glow from the lantern he had taken, and of the child himself no trace.
At the time Nahum thought the lantern and pail were gone too but when dawn came, and the man had plodded back from his all night search of the woods and fields, he had found some very curious things near the well.
There was a crushed and apparently somewhat melted mass of iron which had certainly been the lantern while a bent pail and twisted iron hoops beside it, both half fused, seemed to hint at the remnants of the pail.
That was all.
Nahum was past imagining, Mrs. Pierce was blank, and Ammi, when he had reached home and heard the tale, could give no guess.
Merwin was gone, and there would be no use in telling the people around, who shunned all Gardners now.
No use, either, in telling the city people at Arkham who laughed at everything.
Thad was gone, and now Merwin was gone.
Something was creeping and creeping and waiting to be seen and heard.
Nahum would go soon, and he wanted Ammi to look after his wife and Zenas if they survived him.
It must all be a judgment of some sort though he could not fancy what for, since he had always walked uprightly in the Lord's ways so far as he knew.
For over two weeks Ammi saw nothing of Nahum and then, worried about what might have happened, he overcame his fears and paid the Gardner place a visit.
There was no smoke from the great chimney, and for a moment the visitor was apprehensive of the worst.
The aspect of the whole farm was shocking greyish withered grass and leaves on the ground, vines falling in brittle wreckage from archaic walls and gables, and great bare trees clawing up at the grey November sky with a studied malevolence which Ammi could not but feel had come from some subtle change in the tilt of the branches.
But Nahum was alive, after all.
He was weak, and lying in a couch in the low ceiled kitchen, but perfectly conscious and able to give simple orders to Zenas.
The room was deadly cold and as Ammi visibly shivered, the host shouted huskily to Zenas for more wood.
Wood, indeed, was sorely needed since the cavernous fireplace was unlit and empty, with a cloud of soot blowing about in the chill wind that came down the chimney.
Presently Nahum asked him if the extra wood had made him any more comfortable, and then Ammi saw what had happened.
The stoutest cord had broken at last, and the hapless farmer's mind was proof against more sorrow.
Questioning tactfully, Ammi could get no clear data at all about the missing Zenas.
''In the well he lives in the well '' was all that the clouded father would say.
Then there flashed across the visitor's mind a sudden thought of the mad wife, and he changed his line of inquiry.
''Nabby?
Why, here she is!''
was the surprised response of poor Nahum, and Ammi soon saw that he must search for himself.
Leaving the harmless babbler on the couch, he took the keys from their nail beside the door and climbed the creaking stairs to the attic.
It was very close and noisome up there, and no sound could be heard from any direction.
Of the four doors in sight, only one was locked, and on this he tried various keys on the ring he had taken.
The third key proved the right one, and after some fumbling Ammi threw open the low white door.
It was quite dark inside, for the window was small and half obscured by the crude wooden bars and Ammi could see nothing at all on the wide planked floor.
The stench was beyond enduring, and before proceeding further he had to retreat to another room and return with his lungs filled with breathable air.
When he did enter he saw something dark in the corner, and upon seeing it more clearly he screamed outright.
While he screamed he thought a momentary cloud eclipsed the window, and a second later he felt himself brushed as if by some hateful current of vapour.
Strange colours danced before his eyes and had not a present horror numbed him he would have thought of the globule in the meteor that the geologist's hammer had shattered, and of the morbid vegetation that had sprouted in the spring.
As it was he thought only of the blasphemous monstrosity which confronted him, and which all too clearly had shared the nameless fate of young Thaddeus and the livestock.
But the terrible thing about the horror was that it very slowly and perceptibly moved as it continued to crumble.
Ammi would give me no added particulars of this scene, but the shape in the corners does not re appear in his tale as a moving object.
There are things which cannot be mentioned, and what is done in common humanity is sometimes cruelly judged by the law.
I gathered that no moving thing was left in that attic room, and that to leave anything capable of motion there would have been a deed so monstrous as to damn any accountable being to eternal torment.
Anyone but a stolid farmer would have fainted or gone mad, but Ammi walked conscious through that low doorway and locked the accursed secret behind him.
There would be Nahum to deal with now he must be fed and tended, and removed to some place where he could be cared for.
Commencing his descent of the dark stairs, Ammi heard a thud below him.
He even thought a scream had been suddenly choked off, and recalled nervously the clammy vapour which had brushed by him in that frightful room above.
What presence had his cry and entry started up?
Halted by some vague fear, he heard still further sounds below.
Indubitably there was a sort of heavy dragging, and a most detestably sticky noise as of some fiendish and unclean species of suction.
With an associative sense goaded to feverish heights, he thought unaccountably of what he had seen upstairs.
Good God!
What eldritch dream world was this into which he had blundered?
He dared move neither backward nor forward, but stood there trembling at the black curve of the boxed in staircase.
Every trifle of the scene burned itself into his brain.
The sounds, the sense of dread expectancy, the darkness, the steepness of the narrow steps and merciful Heaven!
the faint but unmistakable luminosity of all the woodwork in sight steps, sides, exposed laths, and beams alike.
Then there burst forth a frantic whinny from Ammi's horse outside, followed at once by a clatter which told of a frenzied runaway.
In another moment horse and buggy had gone beyond earshot, leaving the frightened man on the dark stairs to guess what had sent them.
But that was not all.
There had been another sound out there.
A sort of liquid splash water it must have been the well.
He had left Hero untied near it, and a buggy wheel must have brushed the coping and knocked in a stone.
And still the pale phosphorescense glowed in that detestably ancient woodwork.
God!
how old the house was!
Most of it built before 1700.
A feeble scratching on the floor downstairs now sounded distinctly, and Ammi's grip tightened on a heavy stick he had picked up in the attic for some purpose.
Slowly nerving himself, he finished his descent and walked boldly toward the kitchen.
But he did not complete the walk, because what he sought was no longer there.
It had come to meet him, and it was still alive after a fashion.
Whether it had crawled or whether it had been dragged by any external forces, Ammi could not say but the death had been at it.
Everything had happened in the last half hour, but collapse, greying, and disintegration were already far advanced.
There was a horrible brittleness, and dry fragments were scaling off.
Ammi could not touch it, but looked horrifiedly into the distorted parody that had been a face.
''What was it, Nahum what was it?''
He whispered, and the cleft, bulging lips were just able to crackle out a final answer.
''Nothin' ... nothin' ... the colour ... it burns ... cold an' wet, but it burns ... it lived in the well....
I seen it ... a kind o' smoke ... jest like the flowers last spring ... the well shone at night.... Thad an' Merwin an' Zenas ... everything alive ... suckin' the life out of everything ... in that stone ... it must o' come in that stone ... pizened the whole place ... dun't know what it wants ... that round thing them men from the college dug outen the stone ... they smashed it ... it was that same colour ... jest the same, like the flowers an' plants ... must a' ben more of 'em ... seeds ... seeds ... they growed ...
I seen it the fust time this week ... must a' got strong on Zenas ... he was a big boy, full o' life ... it beats down your mind an' then gits ye ... burns ye up ... in the well water ... you was right about that ... evil water ... Zenas never come back from the well ... can't git away ... draws ye ... ye know summ'at's comin', but 'tain't no use ...
I seen it time an' agin Zenas was took ... whar's Nabby, Ammi?
... my head's no good ... dun't know how long sence I fed her ... it'll git her ef we ain't keerful ... jest a colour ... her face is gittin' to hev that colour sometimes towards night ... an' it burns an' sucks ... it come from some place whar things ain't as they is here ... one o' them professors said so ... he was right ... look out, Ammi, it'll do suthin' more ... sucks the life out....''  But that was all.
That which spoke could speak no more because it had completely caved in.
Ammi laid a red checked tablecloth over what was left and reeled out the back door into the fields.
He climbed the slope to the ten acre pasture and stumbled home by the north road and the woods.
He could not pass that well from which his horses had run away.
He had looked at it through the window, and had seen that no stone was missing from the rim.
Then the lurching buggy had not dislodged anything after all the splash had been something else something which went into the well after it had done with poor Nahum....
When Ammi reached his house the horses and buggy had arrived before him and thrown his wife into fits of anxiety.
Reassuring her without explanations, he set out at once for Arkham and notified the authorities that the Gardner family was no more.
He indulged in no details, but merely told of the deaths of Nahum and Nabby, that of Thaddeus being already known, and mentioned that the cause seemed to be the same strange ailment which had killed the livestock.
He also stated that Merwin and Zenas had disappeared.
There was considerable questioning at the police station, and in the end Ammi was compelled to take three officers to the Gardner farm, together with the coroner, the medical examiner, and the veterinary who had treated the diseased animals.
He went much against his will, for the afternoon was advancing and he feared the fall of night over that accursed place, but it was some comfort to have so many people with him.
The six men drove out in a democrat wagon, following Ammi's buggy, and arrived at the pest ridden farmhouse about four o'clock.
Used as the officers were to gruesome experiences, not one remained unmoved at what was found in the attic and under the red checked tablecloth on the floor below.
The whole aspect of the farm with its grey desolation was terrible enough, but those two crumbling objects were beyond all bounds.
No one could look long at them, and even the medical examiner admitted that there was very little to examine.
Specimens could be analysed, of course, so he busied himself in obtaining them and here it develops that a very puzzling aftermath occurred at the college laboratory where the two phials of dust were finally taken.
Under the spectroscope both samples gave off an unknown spectrum, in which many of the baffling bands were precisely like those which the strange meteor had yielded in the previous year.
The property of emitting this spectrum vanished in a month, the dust thereafter consisting mainly of alkaline phosphates and carbonates.
Ammi would not have told the men about the well if he had thought they meant to do anything then and there.
It was getting toward sunset, and he was anxious to be away.
But he could not help glancing nervously at the stony curb by the great sweep, and when a detective questioned him he admitted that Nahum had feared something down there so much so that he had never even thought of searching it for Merwin or Zenas.
After that nothing would do but that they empty and explore the well immediately, so Ammi had to wait trembling while pail after pail of rank water was hauled up and splashed on the soaking ground outside.
The men sniffed in disgust at the fluid, and toward the last held their noses against the foetor they were uncovering.
It was not so long a job as they had feared it would be, since the water was phenomenally low.
There is no need to speak too exactly of what they found.
Merwin and Zenas were both there, in part, though the vestiges were mainly skeletal.
There were also a small deer and a large dog in about the same state, and a number of bones of smaller animals.
The ooze and slime at the bottom seemed inexplicably porous and bubbling, and a man who descended on hand holds with a long pole found that he could sink the wooden shaft to any depth in the mud of the floor without meeting any solid obstruction.
Twilight had now fallen, and lanterns were brought from the house.
Then, when it was seen that nothing further could be gained from the well, everyone went indoors and conferred in the ancient sitting room while the intermittent light of a spectral half moon played wanly on the grey desolation outside.
The men were frankly nonplussed by the entire case, and could find no convincing common element to link the strange vegetable conditions, the unknown disease of livestock and humans, and the unaccountable deaths of Merwin and Zenas in the tainted well.
They had heard the common country talk, it is true but could not believe that anything contrary to natural law had occurred.
No doubt the meteor had poisoned the soil, but the illness of person and animals who had eaten nothing grown in that soil was another matter.
Was it the well water?
Very possibly.
It might be a good idea to analyse it.
But what peculiar madness could have made both boys jump into the well?
Their deeds were so similar and the fragments showed that they had both suffered from the grey brittle death.
Why was everything so grey and brittle?
It was the coroner, seated near a window overlooking the yard, who first noticed the glow about the well.
Night had fully set in, and all the abhorrent grounds seemed faintly luminous with more than the fitful moonbeams but this new glow was something definite and distinct, and appeared to shoot up from the black pit like a softened ray from a searchlight, giving dull reflections in the little ground pools where the water had been emptied.
It had a very queer colour, and as all the men clustered round the window Ammi gave a violent start.
For this strange beam of ghastly miasma was to him of no unfamiliar hue.
He had seen that colour before, and feared to think what it might mean.
He had seen it in the nasty brittle globule in that aerolite two summers ago, had seen it in the crazy vegetation of the springtime, and had thought he had seen it for an instant that very morning against the small barred window of that terrible attic room where nameless things had happened.
It had flashed there a second, and a clammy and hateful current of vapour had brushed past him and then poor Nahum had been taken by something of that colour.
He had said so at the last said it was like the globule and the plants.
After that had come the runaway in the yard and the splash in the well and now that well was belching forth to the night a pale insidious beam of the same demoniac tint.
It does credit to the alertness of Ammi's mind that he puzzled even at that tense moment over a point which was essentially scientific.
He could not but wonder at his gleaning of the same impression from a vapour glimpsed in the daytime, against a window opening in the morning sky, and from a nocturnal exhalation seen as a phosphorescent mist against the black and blasted landscape.
It wasn't right it was against Nature and he thought of those terrible last words of his stricken friend, ''It come from some place whar things ain't as they is here ... one o' them professors said so....''  All three horses outside, tied to a pair of shrivelled saplings by the road, were now neighing and pawing frantically.
The wagon driver started for the door to do something, but Ammi laid a shaky hand on his shoulder.
''Dun't go out thar,'' he whispered.
''They's more to this nor what we know.
Nahum said somethin' lived in the well that sucks your life out.
He said it must be some'at growed from a round ball like one we all seen in the meteor stone that fell a year ago June.
Sucks an' burns, he said, an' is jest a cloud of colour like that light out thar now, that ye can hardly see an' can't tell what it is.
Nahum thought it feeds on everything livin' an' gits stronger all the time.
He said he seen it this last week.
It must be somethin' from away off in the sky like the men from the college last year says the meteor stone was.
The way it's made an' the way it works ain't like no way o' God's world.
It's some'at from beyond.''
So the men paused indecisively as the light from the well grew stronger and the hitched horses pawed and whinnied in increasing frenzy.
It was truly an awful moment with terror in that ancient and accursed house itself, four monstrous sets of fragments two from the house and two from the well in the woodshed behind, and that shaft of unknown and unholy iridescence from the slimy depths in front.
Ammi had restrained the driver on impulse, forgetting how uninjured he himself was after the clammy brushing of that coloured vapour in the attic room, but perhaps it is just as well that he acted as he did.
No one will ever know what was abroad that night and though the blasphemy from beyond had not so far hurt any human of unweakened mind, there is no telling what it might not have done at that last moment, and with its seemingly increased strength and the special signs of purpose it was soon to display beneath the half clouded moonlit sky.
All at once one of the detectives at the window gave a short, sharp gasp.
The others looked at him, and then quickly followed his own gaze upward to the point at which its idle straying had been suddenly arrested.
There was no need for words.
What had been disputed in country gossip was disputable no longer, and it is because of the thing which every man of that party agreed in whispering later on, that strange days are never talked about in Arkham.
It is necessary to premise that there was no wind at that hour of the evening.
One did arise not long afterward, but there was absolutely none then.
Even the dry tips of the lingering hedge mustard, grey and blighted, and the fringe on the roof of the standing democrat wagon were unstirred.
And yet amid that tense, godless calm the high bare boughs of all the trees in the yard were moving.
They were twitching morbidly and spasmodically, clawing in convulsive and epileptic madness at the moonlit clouds scratching impotently in the noxious air as if jerked by some allied and bodiless line of linkage with sub terrene horrors writhing and struggling below the black roots.
Not a man breathed for several seconds.
Then a cloud of darker depth passed over the moon, and the silhouette of clutching branches faded out momentarily.
At this there was a general cry muffled with awe, but husky and almost identical from every throat.
For the terror had not faded with the silhouette, and in a fearsome instant of deeper darkness the watchers saw wriggling at the treetop height a thousand tiny points of faint and unhallowed radiance, tipping each bough like the fire of St. Elmo or the flames that come down on the apostles' heads at Pentecost.
It was a monstrous constellation of unnatural light, like a glutted swarm of corpse fed fireflies dancing hellish sarabands over an accursed marsh and its colour was that same nameless intrusion which Ammi had come to recognise and dread.
All the while the shaft of phosphorescence from the well was getting brighter and brighter, bringing to the minds of the huddled men, a sense of doom and abnormality which far outraced any image their conscious minds could form.
It was no longer shining out it was pouring out and as the shapeless stream of unplaceable colour left the well it seemed to flow directly into the sky.
Illustration ... and in the fearsome instant of deeper darkness, the watchers saw wriggling at that treetop height, a thousand tiny points of faint and unhallowed radiance, tipping each bough like the fire of St. Elmo ... and all the while the shaft of phosphorescence from the well was getting brighter and brighter and bringing to the minds of the huddled men, a sense of doom and abnormality....
It was no longer shining out it was pouring out and as the shapeless stream of unplaceable colour left the well, it seemed to flow directly into the sky.
The veterinary shivered, and walked to the front door to drop the heavy extra bar across it.
Ammi shook no less, and had to tug and point for lack of a controllable voice when he wished to draw notice to the growing luminosity of the trees.
The neighing and stamping of the horses had become utterly frightful, but not a soul of that group in the old house would have ventured forth for any earthly reward.
With the moments the shining of the trees increased, while their restless branches seemed to strain more and more toward verticality.
The wood of the well sweep was shining now, and presently a policeman dumbly pointed to some wooden sheds and beehives near the stone wall on the west.
They were commencing to shine, too, though the tethered vehicles of the visitors seemed so far unaffected.
Then there was a wild commotion and clopping in the road, and as Ammi quenched the lamp for better seeing they realized that the span of frantic grays had broken their sapling and run off with the democrat wagon.
The shock served to loosen several tongues, and embarrassed whispers were exchanged.
''It spreads on everything organic that's been around here,'' muttered the medical examiner.
No one replied, but the man who had been in the well gave a hint that his long pole must have stirred up something intangible.
''It was awful,'' he added.
''There was no bottom at all.
Just ooze and bubbles and the feeling of something lurking under there.''
Ammi's horse still pawed and screamed deafeningly in the road outside, and nearly drowned its owner's faint quaver as he mumbled his formless reflections.
''It come from that stone it growed down thar it got everything livin' it fed itself on 'em, mind and body Thad an' Merwin, Zenas an' Nabby Nahum was the last they all drunk the water it got strong on 'em it come from beyond, whar things ain't like they be here now it's goin' home ''  At this point, as the column of unknown colour flared suddenly stronger and began to weave itself into fantastic suggestions of shape which each spectator later described differently, there came from poor tethered Hero such a sound as no man before or since ever heard from a horse.
Every person in that low pitched sitting room stopped his ears, and Ammi turned away from the window in horror and nausea.
Words could not convey it when Ammi looked out again the hapless beast lay huddled inert on the moonlit ground between the splintered shafts of the buggy.
That was the last of Hero till they buried him next day.
But the present was no time to mourn, for almost at this instant a detective silently called attention to something terrible in the very room with them.
In the absence of the lamplight it was clear that a faint phosphorescence had begun to pervade the entire apartment.
It glowed on the broad planked floor where the rag carpet left it bare, and shimmered over the sashes of the small paned windows.
It ran up and down the exposed corner posts, coruscated about the shelf and mantel, and infected the very doors and furniture.
Each minute saw it strengthen, and at last it was very plain that healthy living things must leave that house.
Ammi showed them the back door and the path up through the fields to the ten acre pasture.
They walked and stumbled as in a dream, and did not dare look back till they were far away on the high ground.
They were glad of the path, for they could not have gone the front way, by that well.
It was bad enough passing the glowing barn and sheds, and those shining orchard trees with their gnarled, fiendish contours but thank Heaven the branches did their worst twisting high up.
The moon went under some very black clouds as they crossed the rustic bridge over Chapman's Brook, and it was blind groping from there to the open meadows.
When they looked back toward the valley and the distant Gardner place at the bottom they saw a fearsome sight.
All the farm was shining with the hideous unknown blend of colour trees, buildings, and even such grass and herbage as had not been wholly changed to lethal grey brittleness.
The boughs were all straining skyward, tipped with tongues of foul flame, and lambent tricklings of the same monstrous fire were creeping about the ridgepoles of the house, barn and sheds.
It was a scene from a vision of Fuseli, and over all the rest reigned that riot of luminous amorphousness, that alien and undimensioned rainbow of cryptic poison from the well seething, feeling, lapping, reaching, scintillating, straining, and malignly bubbling in its cosmic and unrecognizable chromaticism.
Then without warning the hideous thing shot vertically up toward the sky like a rocket or meteor, leaving behind no trail and disappearing through a round and curiously regular hole in the clouds before any man could gasp or cry out.
No watcher can ever forget that sight, and Ammi stared blankly at the stars of Cygnus, Deneb twinkling above the others, where the unknown colour had melted into the Milky Way.
But his gaze was the next moment called swiftly to earth by the crackling in the valley.
It was just that.
Only a wooden ripping and crackling, and not an explosion, as so many others of the party vowed.
Yet the outcome was the same, for in one feverish kaleidoscopic instant there burst up from that doomed and accursed farm a gleamingly eruptive cataclysm of unnatural sparks and substance blurring the glance of the few who saw it, and sending forth to the zenith a bombarding cloudburst of such coloured and fantastic fragments as our universe must needs disown.
Through quickly re closing vapours they followed the great morbidity that had vanished, and in another second they had vanished too.
Behind and below was only a darkness to which the men dared not return, and all about was a mounting wind which seemed to sweep down in black, frore gusts from interstellar space.
It shrieked and howled, and lashed the fields and distorted woods in a mad cosmic frenzy, till soon the trembling party realized it would be no use waiting for the moon to show what was left down there at Nahum's.
Too awed even to hint theories, the seven shaking men trudged back toward Arkham by the north road.
Ammi was worse than his fellows, and begged them to see him inside his own kitchen, instead of keeping straight on to town.
He did not wish to cross the blighted, wind whipped woods alone to his home on the main road.
For he had had an added shock that the others were spared, and was crushed for ever with a brooding fear he dared not even mention for many years to come.
As the rest of the watchers on that tempestuous hill had stolidly set their faces toward the road, Ammi had looked back an instant at the shadowed valley of desolation so lately sheltering his ill starred friend.
And from that stricken, far away spot he had seen something feebly rise, only to sink down again upon the place from which the great shapeless horror had shot into the sky.
It was just a colour but not any colour of our earth or heavens.
And because Ammi recognized that colour, and knew that this last faint remnant must still lurk down there in the well, he has never been quite right since.
Ammi would never go near the place again.
It is forty four years now since the horror happened, but he has never been there, and will be glad when the new reservoir blots it out.
I shall be glad, too, for I do not like the way the sunlight changed colour around the mouth of that abandoned well I passed.
I hope the water will always be very deep but even so, I shall never drink it.
I do not think I shall visit the Arkham country hereafter.
Three of the men who had been with Ammi returned the next morning to see the ruins by daylight, but there were not any real ruins.
Only the bricks of the chimney, the stones of the cellar, some mineral and metallic litter here and there, and the rim of that nefandous well.
Save for Ammi's dead horse, which they towed away and buried, and the buggy which they shortly returned to him, everything that had ever been living had gone.
Five eldritch acres of dusty grey desert remained, nor has anything ever grown there since.
To this day it sprawls open to the sky like a great spot eaten by acid in the woods and fields, and the few who have ever dared glimpse it in spite of the rural tales have named it ''the blasted heath.''
The rural tales are queer.
They might be even queerer if city men and college chemists could be interested enough to analyze the water from that disused well, or the grey dust that no wind seems ever to disperse.
Botanists, too, ought to study the stunted flora on the borders of that spot, for they might shed light on the country notion that the blight is spreading little by little, perhaps an inch a year.
People say the colour of the neighboring herbage is not quite right in the spring, and that wild things leave queer prints in the light winter snow.
Snow never seems quite so heavy on the blasted heath as it is elsewhere.
Horses the few that are left in this motor age grow skittish in the silent valley and hunters cannot depend on their dogs too near the splotch of greyish dust.
They say the mental influences are very bad, too numbers went queer in the years after Nahum's taking, and always they lacked the power to get away.
Then the stronger minded folk all left the region, and only the foreigners tried to live in the crumbling old homesteads.
They could not stay, though and one sometimes wonders what insight beyond ours their wild, weird stories of whispered magic have given them.
Their dreams at night, they protest, are very horrible in that grotesque country and surely the very look of the dark realm is enough to stir a morbid fancy.
No traveler has ever escaped a sense of strangeness in those deep ravines, and artists shiver as they paint thick woods whose mystery is as much of the spirits as of the eye.
I myself am curious about the sensation I derived from my one lone walk before Ammi told me his tale.
When twilight came I had vaguely wished some clouds would gather, for odd timidity about the deep skyey voids above had crept into my soul.
Do not ask me for my opinion.
I do not know that is all.
There was no one but Ammi to question for Arkham people will not talk about the strange days, and all three professors who saw the aerolite and its coloured globule are dead.
There were other globules depend upon that.
One must have fed itself and escaped, and probably there was another which was too late.
No doubt it is still down the well I know there was something wrong with the sunlight I saw above that miasmal brink.
The rustics say the blight creeps an inch a year, so perhaps there is a kind of growth or nourishment even now.
But whatever demon hatchling is there, it must be tethered to something or else it would quickly spread.
Is it fastened to the roots of those trees that claw the air?
One of the current Arkham tales is about fat oaks that shine and move as they ought not to do at night.
What it is, only God knows.
In terms of matter I suppose the thing Ammi described would be called a gas, but this gas obeyed laws that are not of our cosmos.
This was no fruit of such worlds and suns as shine on the telescopes and photographic plates of our observatories.
This was no breath from the skies whose motions and dimensions our astronomers measure or deem too vast to measure.
It was just a colour out of space a frightful messenger from unformed realms of infinity beyond all Nature as we know it from realms whose mere existence stuns the brain and numbs us with the black extra cosmic gulfs it throws open before our frenzied eyes.
I doubt very much if Ammi consciously lied to me, and I do not think his tale was all a freak of madness as the townsfolk had forewarned.
Something terrible came to the hills and valleys on that meteor, and something terrible though I know not in what proportion still remains.
I shall be glad to see the water come.
Meanwhile I hope nothing will happen to Ammi.
He saw so much of the thing and its influence was so insidious.
Why has he never been able to move away?
How clearly he recalled those dying words of Nahum's ''can't git away draws ye ye know summ'at's comin', but 'tain't no use '' Ammi is such a good old man when the reservoir gang gets to work I must write the chief engineer to keep a sharp watch on him.
I would hate to think of him as the grey, twisted, brittle monstrosity which persists more and more in troubling my sleep.
The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents.
We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far.
The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little but some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the deadly light into the peace and safety of a new dark age.
Theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cycle wherein our world and human race form transient incidents.
They have hinted at strange survivals in terms which would freeze the blood if not masked by a bland optimism.
But it is not from them that there came the single glimpse of forbidden eons which chills me when I think of it and maddens me when I dream of it.
That glimpse, like all dread glimpses of truth, flashed out from an accidental piecing together of separated things in this case an old newspaper item and the notes of a dead professor.
I hope that no one else will accomplish this piecing out certainly, if I live, I shall never knowingly supply a link in so hideous a chain.
I think that the professor, too, intended to keep silent regarding the part he knew, and that he would have destroyed his notes had not sudden death seized him.
My knowledge of the thing began in the winter of 1926 27 with the death of my grand uncle, George Gammell Angell, Professor Emeritus of Semitic languages in Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island.
Professor Angell was widely known as an authority on ancient inscriptions, and had frequently been resorted to by the heads of prominent museums so that his passing at the age of ninety two may be recalled by many.
Locally, interest was intensified by the obscurity of the cause of death.
The professor had been stricken whilst returning from the Newport boat falling suddenly, as witnesses said, after having been jostled by a nautical looking negro who had come from one of the queer dark courts on the precipitous hillside which formed a short cut from the waterfront to the deceased's home in Williams Street.
Physicians were unable to find any visible disorder, but concluded after perplexed debate that some obscure lesion of the heart, induced by the brisk ascent of so steep a hill by so elderly a man, was responsible for the end.
At the time I saw no reason to dissent from this dictum, but latterly I am inclined to wonder and more than wonder.
As my granduncle's heir and executor, for he died a childless widower, I was expected to go over his papers with some thoroughness and for that purpose moved his entire set of files and boxes to my quarters in Boston.
Much of the material which I correlated will be later published by the American Archeological Society, but there was one box which I found exceedingly puzzling, and which I felt much averse from showing to other eyes.
It had been locked, and I did not find the key till it occurred to me to examine the personal ring which the professor carried always in his pocket.
Then, indeed, I succeeded in opening it, but when I did so seemed only to be confronted by a greater and more closely locked barrier.
For what could be the meaning of the queer clay bas relief and the disjointed jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which I found?
Had my uncle, in his latter years, become credulous of the most superficial impostures?
I resolved to search out the eccentric sculptor responsible for this apparent disturbance of an old man's peace of mind.
The bas relief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick and about five by six inches in area obviously of modern origin.
Its designs, however, were far from modern in atmosphere and suggestion for, although the vagaries of cubism and futurism are many and wild, they do not often reproduce that cryptic regularity which lurks in prehistoric writing.
And writing of some kind the bulk of these designs seemed certainly to be though my memory, despite much familiarity with the papers and collections of my uncle, failed in any way to identify this particular species, or even hint at its remotest affiliations.
Above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evidently pictorial intent, though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear idea of its nature.
It seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representing a monster, of a form which only a diseased fancy could conceive.
If I say that my somewhat extravagant imagination yielded simultaneous pictures of an octopus, a dragon, and a human caricature, I shall not be unfaithful to the spirit of the thing.
A pulpy, tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary wings but it was the general outline of the whole which made it most shockingly frightful.
Behind the figure was a vague suggestion of a Cyclopean architectural background.
The writing accompanying this oddity was, aside from a stack of press cuttings, in Professor Angell's most recent hand and made no pretense to literary style.
What seemed to be the main document was headed ''CTHULHU CULT'' in characters painstakingly printed to avoid the erroneous reading of a word so unheard of.
This manuscript was divided into two sections, the first of which was headed ''1925 Dream and Dream Work of H. A. Wilcox, 7 Thomas St., Providence, R. I.,'' and the second, ''Narrative of Inspector John R. Legrasse, 121 Bienville St., New Orleans, La., at 1908 A.
A. S. Mtg Notes on Same, and Prof. Webb's Acct.''
The other manuscript papers were all brief notes, some of them accounts of the queer dreams of different persons, some of them citations from theosophical books and magazines notably W. Scott Eliott's Atlantis and the Lost Lemuria, and the rest comments on long surviving secret societies and hidden cults, with references to passages in such mythological and anthropological source books as Frazer's Golden Bough and Miss Murray's Witch Cult in Western Europe.
The cuttings largely alluded to outre mental illnesses and outbreaks of group folly or mania in the spring of 1925.
The first half of the principal manuscript told a very peculiar tale.
It appears that on March 1st, 1925, a thin, dark young man of neurotic and excited aspect had called upon Professor Angell bearing the singular clay bas relief, which was then exceedingly damp and fresh.
His card bore the name of Henry Anthony Wilcox, and my uncle had recognized him as the youngest son of an excellent family slightly known to him, who had latterly been studying sculpture at the Rhode Island School of Design and living alone at the Fleur de Lys Building near that institution.
Wilcox was a precocious youth of known genius but great eccentricity, and had from childhood excited attention through the strange stories and odd dreams he was in the habit of relating.
He called himself ''psychically hypersensitive'', but the staid folk of the ancient commercial city dismissed him as merely ''queer''.
Never mingling much with his kind, he had dropped gradually from social visibility, and was now known only to a small group of esthetes from other towns.
Even the Providence Art Club, anxious to preserve its conservatism, had found him quite hopeless.
On the occasion of the visit, ran the professor's manuscript, the sculptor abruptly asked for the benefit of his host's archeological knowledge in identifying the hieroglyphics on the bas relief.
He spoke in a dreamy, stilted manner which suggested pose and alienated sympathy and my uncle showed some sharpness in replying, for the conspicuous freshness of the tablet implied kinship with anything but archeology.
Young Wilcox's rejoinder, which impressed my uncle enough to make him recall and record it verbatim, was of a fantastically poetic cast which must have typified his whole conversation, and which I have since found highly characteristic of him.
He said, ''It is new, indeed, for I made it last night in a dream of strange cities and dreams are older than brooding Tyre, or the contemplative Sphinx, or garden girdled Babylon.''
It was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played upon a sleeping memory and won the fevered interest of my uncle.
There had been a slight earthquake tremor the night before, the most considerable felt in New England for some years and Wilcox's imagination had been keenly affected.
Upon retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream of great Cyclopean cities of Titan blocks and sky flung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister with latent horror.
Hieroglyphics had covered the walls and pillars, and from some undetermined point below had come a voice that was not a voice a chaotic sensation which only fancy could transmute into sound, but which he attempted to render by the almost unpronounceable jumble of letters, ''Cthulhu fhtagn''.
This verbal jumble was the key to the recollection which excited and disturbed Professor Angell.
He questioned the sculptor with scientific minuteness and studied with almost frantic intensity the bas relief on which the youth had found himself working, chilled and clad only in his nightclothes, when waking had stolen bewilderingly over him.
My uncle blamed his old age, Wilcox afterward said, for his slowness in recognizing both hieroglyphics and pictorial design.
Many of his questions seemed highly out of place to his visitor, especially those which tried to connect the latter with strange cults or societies and Wilcox could not understand the repeated promises of silence which he was offered in exchange for an admission of membership in some widespread mystical or paganly religious body.
When Professor Angell became convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant of any cult or system of cryptic lore, he besieged his visitor with demands for future reports of dreams.
This bore regular fruit, for after the first interview the manuscript records daily calls of the young man, during which he related startling fragments of nocturnal imagery whose burden was always some terrible Cyclopean vista of dark and dripping stone, with a subterrene voice or intelligence shouting monotonously in enigmatical sense impacts uninscribable save as gibberish.
The two sounds most frequently repeated are those rendered by the letters ''Cthulhu'' and ''R'lyeh''.
On March 23rd, the manuscript continued, Wilcox failed to appear and inquiries at his quarters revealed that he had been stricken with an obscure sort of fever and taken to the home of his family in Waterman Street.
He had cried out in the night, arousing several other artists in the building, and had manifested since then only alternations of unconsciousness and delirium.
My uncle at once telephoned the family, and from that time forward kept close watch of the case calling often at the Thayer Street office of Dr. Tobey, whom he learned to be in charge.
The youth's febrile mind, apparently, was dwelling on strange things and the doctor shuddered now and then as he spoke of them.
They included not only a repetition of what he had formerly dreamed, but touched wildly on a gigantic thing ''miles high'' which walked or lumbered about.
He at no time fully described this object, but occasional frantic words, as repeated by Dr. Tobey, convinced the professor that it must be identical with the nameless monstrosity he had sought to depict in his dream sculpture.
Reference to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the young man's subsidence into lethargy.
His temperature, oddly enough, was not greatly above normal but the whole condition was otherwise such as to suggest true fever rather than mental disorder.
On April 2nd at about 3 p. m. every trace of Wilcox's malady suddenly ceased.
He sat upright in bed, astonished to find himself at home and completely ignorant of what had happened in dream or reality since the night of March 22nd.
Pronounced well by his physician, he returned to his quarters in three days but to Professor Angell he was of no further assistance.
All traces of strange dreaming had vanished with his recovery, and my uncle kept no record of his night thoughts after a week of pointless and irrelevant accounts of thoroughly usual visions.
Here the first part of the manuscript ended, but references to certain of the scattered notes gave me much material for thought so much, in fact, that only the ingrained skepticism then forming my philosophy can account for my continued distrust of the artist.
The notes in question were those descriptive of the dreams of various persons covering the same period as that in which young Wilcox had had his strange visitations.
My uncle, it seems, had quickly instituted a prodigiously far flung body of inquiries amongst nearly all the friends whom he could question without impertinence, asking for nightly reports of their dreams, and the dates of any notable visions for some time past.
The reception of his request seems to have been varied but he must, at the very least, have received more responses than any ordinary man could have handled without a secretary.
This original correspondence was not preserved, but his notes formed a thorough and really significant digest.
Average people in society and business New England's traditional ''salt of the earth'' gave an almost completely negative result, though scattered cases of uneasy but formless nocturnal impressions appear here and there, always between March 23rd and April 2nd the period of young Wilcox's delirium.
Scientific men were little more affected, though four cases of vague description suggest fugitive glimpses of strange landscapes, and in one case there is mentioned a dread of something abnormal.
It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came, and I know that panic would have broken loose had they been able to compare notes.
As it was, lacking their original letters, I half suspected the compiler of having asked leading questions, or of having edited the correspondence in corroboration of what he had latently resolved to see.
That is why I continued to feel that Wilcox, somehow cognizant of the old data which my uncle had possessed, had been imposing on the veteran scientist.
These responses from esthetes told a disturbing tale.
From February 28th to April 2nd a large proportion of them had dreamed very bizarre things, the intensity of the dreams being immeasurably the stronger during the period of the sculptor's delirium.
Over a fourth of those who reported anything, reported scenes and half sounds not unlike those which Wilcox had described and some of the dreamers confessed acute fear of the gigantic nameless thing visible toward the last.
One case, which the note describes with emphasis, was very sad.
The subject, a widely known architect with leanings toward theosophy and occultism, went violently insane on the date of young Wilcox's seizure, and expired several months later after incessant screamings to be saved from some escaped denizen of hell.
Had my uncle referred to these cases by name instead of merely by number, I should have attempted some corroboration and personal investigation but as it was, I succeeded in tracing down only a few.
All of these, however, bore out the notes in full.
I have often wondered if all the objects of the professor's questioning felt as puzzled as did this fraction.
It is well that no explanation shall ever reach them.
The press cuttings, as I have intimated, touched on cases of panic, mania, and eccentricity during the given period.
Professor Angell must have employed a cutting bureau, for the number of extracts was tremendous, and the sources scattered throughout the globe.
Here was a nocturnal suicide in London, where a lone sleeper had leaped from a window after a shocking cry.
Here likewise a rambling letter to the editor of a paper in South America, where a fanatic deduces a dire future from visions he has seen.
A dispatch from California describes a theosophist colony as donning white robes en masse for some ''glorious fulfilment'' which never arrives, whilst items from India speak guardedly of serious native unrest toward the end of March.
Voodoo orgies multiply in Haiti, and African outposts report ominous mutterings.
American officers in the Philippines find certain tribes bothersome about this time, and New York policemen are mobbed by hysterical Levantines on the night of March 22 23.
The west of Ireland, too, is full of wild rumor and legendry, and a fantastic painter named Ardois Bonnot hangs a blasphemous Dream Landscape in the Paris spring salon of 1926.
And so numerous are the recorded troubles in insane asylums that only a miracle can have stopped the medical fraternity from noting strange parallelisms and drawing mystified conclusions.
A weird bunch of cuttings, all told and I can at this date scarcely envisage the callous rationalism with which I set them aside.
But I was then convinced that young Wilcox had known of the older matters mentioned by the professor.
The older matters which had made the sculptor's dream and bas relief so significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half of his long manuscript.
Once before, it appears, Professor Angell had seen the hellish outlines of the nameless monstrosity, puzzled over the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the ominous syllables which can be rendered only as ''Cthulhu'' and all this in so stirring and horrible a connection that it is small wonder he pursued young Wilcox with queries and demands for data.
This earlier experience had come in 1908, seventeen years before, when the American Archeological Society held its annual meeting in St. Louis.
Professor Angell, as befitted one of his authority and attainments, had had a prominent part in all the deliberations and was one of the first to be approached by the several outsiders who took advantage of the convocation to offer questions for correct answering and problems for expert solution.
The chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the entire meeting, was a commonplace looking middle aged man who had traveled all the way from New Orleans for certain special information unobtainable from any local source.
His name was John Raymond Legrasse, and he was by profession an inspector of police.
With him he bore the subject of his visit, a grotesque, repulsive, and apparently very ancient stone statuette whose origin he was at a loss to determine.
It must not be fancied that Inspector Legrasse had the least interest in archeology.
On the contrary, his wish for enlightenment was prompted by purely professional considerations.
The statuette, idol, fetish, or whatever it was, had been captured some months before in the wooded swamps south of New Orleans during a raid on a supposed voodoo meeting and so singular and hideous were the rites connected with it, that the police could not but realize that they had stumbled on a dark cult totally unknown to them, and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of the African voodoo circles.
Of its origin, apart from the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted from the captured members, absolutely nothing was to be discovered hence the anxiety of the police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to place the frightful symbol, and through it track down the cult to its fountain head.
Inspector Legrasse was scarcely prepared for the sensation which his offering created.
One sight of the thing had been enough to throw the assembled men of science into a state of tense excitement, and they lost no time in crowding around him to gaze at the diminutive figure whose utter strangeness and air of genuinely abysmal antiquity hinted so potently at unopened and archaic vistas.
No recognized school of sculpture had animated this terrible object, yet centuries and even thousands of years seemed recorded in its dim and greenish surface of unplaceable stone.
The figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for close and careful study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and of exquisitely artistic workmanship.
It represented a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopuslike head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery looking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind.
This thing, which seemed instinct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy, was of a somewhat bloated corpulence, and squatted evilly on a rectangular block or pedestal covered with undecipherable characters.
The tips of the wings touched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the center, whilst the long, curved claws of the doubled up, crouching hind legs gripped the front edge and extended a quarter of the way down toward the bottom of the pedestal.
The cephalopod head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial feelers brushed the backs of huge forepaws which clasped the croucher's elevated knees.
The aspect of the whole was abnormally lifelike, and the more subtly fearful because its source was so totally unknown.
Its vast, awesome, and incalculable age was unmistakable yet not one link did it show with any known type of art belonging to civilization's youth or indeed to any other time.
Totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery for the soapy, greenish black stone with its golden or iridescent flecks and striations resembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy.
The characters along the base were equally baffling and no member present, despite a representation of half the world's expert learning in this field, could form the least notion of even their remotest linguistic kinship.
They, like the subject and material, belonged to something horribly remote and distinct from mankind as we know it something frightfully suggestive of old and unhallowed cycles of life in which our world and our conceptions have no part.
And yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confessed defeat at the inspector's problem, there was one man in that gathering who suspected a touch of bizarre familiarity in the monstrous shape and writing, and who presently told with some diffidence of the odd trifle he knew.
This person was the late William Channing Webb, professor of anthropology in Princeton University, and an explorer of no slight note.
Professor Webb had been engaged, forty eight years before, in a tour of Greenland and Iceland in search of some Runic inscriptions which he failed to unearth and whilst high up on the West Greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or cult of degenerate Eskimos whose religion, a curious form of devil worship, chilled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness.
It was a faith of which other Eskimos knew little, and which they mentioned only with shudders, saying that it had come down from horribly ancient eons before ever the world was made.
Besides nameless rites and human sacrifices there were certain queer hereditary rituals addressed to a supreme elder devil or tornasuk and of this Professor Webb had taken a careful phonetic copy from an aged angekok or wizard priest, expressing the sounds in Roman letters as best he knew how.
But just now of prime significance was the fetish which this cult had cherished, and around which they danced when the aurora leaped high over the ice cliffs.
It was, the professor stated, a very crude bas relief of stone, comprising a hideous picture and some cryptic writing.
And as far as he could tell, it was a rough parallel in all essential features of the bestial thing now lying before the meeting.
These data, received with suspense and astonishment by the assembled members, proved doubly exciting to Inspector Legrasse and he began at once to ply his informant with questions.
Having noted and copied an oral ritual among the swamp cult worshipers his men had arrested, he besought the professor to remember as best he might the syllables taken down amongst the diabolist Eskimos.
There then followed an exhaustive comparison of details, and a moment of really awed silence when both detective and scientist agreed on the virtual identity of the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many worlds of distance apart.
What, in substance, both the Eskimo wizards and the Louisiana swamp priests had chanted to their kindred idols was something very like this the word divisions being guessed at from traditional breaks in the phrase as chanted aloud ''Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn.''
Legrasse had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several among his mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them the words meant.
This text, as given, ran something like this ''In his house at R'lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.''
And now, in response to a general urgent demand, Inspector Legrasse related as fully as possible his experience with the swamp worshipers telling a story to which I could see my uncle attached profound significance.
It savored of the wildest dreams of myth maker and theosophist, and disclosed an astonishing degree of cosmic imagination among such half castes and pariahs as might be least expected to possess it.
On November 1st, 1907, there had come to New Orleans police a frantic summons from the swamp and lagoon country to the south.
The squatters there, mostly primitive but good natured descendants of Lafitte's men, were in the grip of stark terror from an unknown thing which had stolen upon them in the night.
It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a more terrible sort than they had ever known and some of their women and children had disappeared since the malevolent tom tom had begun its incessant beating far within the black haunted woods where no dweller ventured.
There were insane shouts and harrowing screams, soul chilling chants and dancing devil flames and, the frightened messenger added, the people could stand it no more.
So a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an automobile, had set out in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as a guide.
At the end of the passable road they alighted, and for miles splashed on in silence through the terrible cypress woods where day never came.
Ugly roots and malignant hanging nooses of Spanish moss beset them, and now and then a pile of dank stones or fragments of a rotting wall intensified by its hint of morbid habitation a depression which every malformed tree and every fungous islet combined to create.
At length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts, hove in sight and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the group of bobbing lanterns.
The muffled beat of tom toms was now faintly audible far, far ahead and a curdling shriek came at infrequent intervals when the wind shifted.
A reddish glare, too, seemed to filter through the pale undergrowth beyond endless avenues of forest night.
Reluctant even to be left alone again, each one of the cowed squatters refused point blank to advance another inch toward the scene of unholy worship, so Inspector Legrasse and his nineteen colleagues plunged on unguided into black arcades of horror that none of them had ever trod before.
The region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evil repute, substantially unknown and untraversed by white men.
There were legends of a hidden lake unglimpsed by mortal sight, in which dwelt a huge, formless white polypous thing with luminous eyes and squatters whispered that bat winged devils flew up out of caverns in inner earth to worship it at midnight.
They said it had been there before D'Iberville, before La Salle, before the Indians, and before even the wholesome beasts and birds of the woods.
It was nightmare itself, and to see it was to die.
But it made men dream, and so they knew enough to keep away.
The present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringe of this abhorred area, but that location was bad enough hence perhaps the very place of the worship had terrified the squatters more than the shocking sounds and incidents.
Only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard by Legrasse's men as they plowed on through the black morass toward the red glare and the muffled tom toms.
There are vocal qualities peculiar to men, and vocal qualities peculiar to beasts and it is terrible to hear the one when the source should yield the other.
Animal fury and orgiastic license here whipped themselves to demoniac heights by howls and squawking ecstasies that tore and reverberated through those nighted woods like pestilential tempests from the gulfs of hell.
Now and then the less organized ululations would cease, and from what seemed a well drilled chorus of hoarse voices would rise in singsong chant that hideous phrase or ritual ''Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn.''
Then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner, came suddenly in sight of the spectacle itself.
Four of them reeled, one fainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which the mad cacophony of the orgy fortunately deadened.
Legrasse dashed swamp water on the face of the fainting man, and all stood trembling and nearly hypnotized with horror.
In a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of perhaps an acre's extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry.
On this now leaped and twisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality than any but a Sime or an Angarola could paint.
Void of clothing, this hybrid spawn were braying, bellowing and writhing about a monstrous ring shaped bonfire in the center of which, revealed by occasional rifts in the curtain of flame, stood a great granite monolith some eight feet in height on top of which, incongruous in its diminutiveness, rested the noxious carven statuette.
From a wide circle of ten scaffolds set up at regular intervals with the flame girt monolith as a center hung, head downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squatters who had disappeared.
It was inside this circle that the ring of worshipers jumped and roared, the general direction of the mass motion being from left to right in endless bacchanale between the ring of bodies and the ring of fire.
It may have been only imagination and it may have been only echoes which induced one of the men, an excitable Spaniard, to fancy he heard antiphonal responses to the ritual from some far and unillumined spot deeper within the wood of ancient legendry and horror.
This man, Joseph D. Galvez, I later met and questioned and he proved distractingly imaginative.
He indeed went so far as to hint of the faint beating of great wings, and of a glimpse of shining eyes and a mountainous white bulk beyond the remotest trees but I suppose he had been hearing too much native superstition.
Actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively brief duration.
Duty came first and although there must have been nearly a hundred mongrel celebrants in the throng, the police relied on their firearms and plunged determinedly into the nauseous rout.
For five minutes the resultant din and chaos were beyond description.
Wild blows were struck, shots were fired, and escapes were made but in the end Legrasse was able to count some forty seven sullen prisoners, whom he forced to dress in haste and fall into line between two rows of policemen.
Five of the worshipers lay dead, and two severely wounded ones were carried away on improvised stretchers by their fellow prisoners.
The image on the monolith, of course, was carefully removed and carried back by Legrasse.
Examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixed blooded, and mentally aberrant type.
Most were seamen, and a sprinkling of negroes and mulattoes, largely West Indians or Brava Portuguese from the Cape Verde Islands, gave a coloring of voodooism to the heterogeneous cult.
But before many questions were asked, it became manifest that something far deeper and older than negro fetishism was involved.
Degraded and ignorant as they were, the creatures held with surprizing consistency to the central idea of their loathsome faith.
They worshiped, so they said, the Great Old Ones who lived ages before there were any men, and who came to the young world out of the sky.
Those Old Ones were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea but their dead bodies had told their secrets in dreams to the first man, who formed a cult which had never died.
This was that cult, and the prisoners said it had always existed and always would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the world until the time when the great priest Cthulhu, from his dark house in the mighty city of R'lyeh under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again beneath his sway.
Some day he would call, when the stars were ready, and the secret cult would always be waiting to liberate him.
Meanwhile no more must be told.
There was a secret which even torture could not extract.
Mankind was not absolutely alone among the conscious things of earth, for shapes came out of the dark to visit the faithful few.
But these were not the Great Old Ones.
No man had ever seen the Old Ones.
The carven idol was great Cthulhu, but none might say whether or not the others were precisely like him.
No one could read the old writing now, but things were told by word of mouth.
The chanted ritual was not the secret that was never spoken aloud, only whispered.
The chant meant only this ''In his house at R'lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.''
Only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be hanged, and the rest were committed to various institutions.
All denied a part in the ritual murders, and averred that the killing had been done by Black winged Ones which had come to them from their immemorial meeting place in the haunted wood.
But of those mysterious allies no coherent account could ever be gained.
What the police did extract came mainly from an immensely aged mestizo named Castro, who claimed to have sailed to strange ports and talked with undying leaders of the cult in the mountains of China.
Old Castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the speculations of theosophists and made man and the world seem recent and transient indeed.
There had been eons when other Things ruled on the earth, and They had had great cities.
Remains of Them, he said the deathless Chinamen had told him, were still to be found as Cyclopean stones on islands in the Pacific.
They all died vast epochs of time before man came, but there were arts which could revive Them when the stars had come round again to the right positions in the cycle of eternity.
They had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and brought Their images with Them.
These Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed altogether of flesh and blood.
They had shape for did not this star fashioned image prove it?
but that shape was not made of matter.
When the stars were right, They could plunge from world to world through the sky but when the stars were wrong, They could not live.
But although They no longer lived, They would never really die.
They all lay in stone houses in Their great city of R'lyeh, preserved by the spells of mighty Cthulhu for a glorious resurrection when the stars and the earth might once more be ready for Them.
But at that time some force from outside must serve to liberate Their bodies.
The spells that preserved Them intact likewise prevented Them from making an initial move, and They could only lie awake in the dark and think whilst uncounted millions of years rolled by.
They knew all that was occurring in the universe, for Their mode of speech was transmitted thought.
Even now They talked in Their tombs.
When, after infinities of chaos, the first men came, the Great Old Ones spoke to the sensitive among them by molding their dreams for only thus could Their language reach the fleshly minds of mammals.
Then, whispered Castro, those first men formed the cult around small idols which the Great Ones showed them idols brought in dim eras from dark stars.
That cult would never die till the stars came right again, and the secret priests would take great Cthulhu from His tomb to revive His subjects and resume His rule of earth.
The time would be easy to know, for then mankind would have become as the Great Old Ones free and wild and beyond good and evil, with laws and morals thrown aside and all men shouting and killing and reveling in joy.
Then the liberated Old Ones would teach them new ways to shout and kill and revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame with a holocaust of ecstasy and freedom.
Meanwhile the cult, by appropriate rites, must keep alive the memory of those ancient ways and shadow forth the prophecy of their return.
In the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed Old Ones in dreams, but then something had happened.
The great stone city R'lyeh, with its monoliths and sepulchers, had sunk beneath the waves and the deep waters, full of the one primal mystery through which not even thought can pass, had cut off the spectral intercourse.
But memory never died, and high priests said that the city would rise again when the stars were right.
Then came out of the earth the black spirits of earth, moldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumors picked up in caverns beneath forgotten sea bottoms.
But of them old Castro dared not speak much.
He cut himself off hurriedly, and no amount of persuasion or subtlety could elicit more in this direction.
The size of the Old Ones, too, he curiously declined to mention.
Of the cult, he said that he thought the center lay amid the pathless deserts of Arabia, where Irem, the City of Pillars, dreams hidden and untouched.
It was not allied to the European witch cult, and was virtually unknown beyond its members.
No book had ever really hinted of it, though the deathless Chinamen said that there were double meanings in the Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred which the initiated might read as they chose, especially the much discussed couplet ''That is not dead which can eternal lie, And with strange eons even death may die.''
Legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had inquired in vain concerning the historic affiliations of the cult.
Castro, apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was wholly secret.
The authorities at Tulane University could shed no light upon either cult or image, and now the detective had come to the highest authorities in the country and met with no more than the Greenland tale of Professor Webb.
The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse's tale, corroborated as it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequent correspondence of those who attended, although scant mention occurs in the formal publication of the society.
Caution is the first care of those accustomed to face occasional charlatanry and imposture.
Legrasse for some time lent the image to Professor Webb, but at the latter's death it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where I viewed it not long ago.
It is truly a terrible thing, and unmistakably akin to the dream sculpture of young Wilcox.
That my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor I did not wonder, for what thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what Legrasse had learned of the cult, of a sensitive young man who had dreamed not only the figure and exact hieroglyphics of the swamp found image and the Greenland devil tablet, but had come in his dreams upon at least three of the precise words of the formula uttered alike by Eskimo diabolists and mongrel Louisianans?
Professor Angell's instant start on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness was eminently natural though privately I suspected young Wilcox of having heard of the cult in some indirect way, and of having invented a series of dreams to heighten and continue the mystery at my uncle's expense.
The dream narratives and cuttings collected by the professor were, of course, strong corroboration but the rationalism of my mind and the extravagance of the whole subject led me to adopt what I thought the most sensible conclusions.
So, after thoroughly studying the manuscript again and correlating the theosophical and anthropological notes with the cult narrative of Legrasse, I made a trip to Providence to see the sculptor and give him the rebuke I thought proper for so boldly imposing upon a learned and aged man.
Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur de Lys Building in Thomas Street, a hideous Victorian imitation of Seventeenth Century Breton architecture which flaunts its stuccoed front amidst the lovely Colonial houses on the ancient hill, and under the very shadow of the finest Georgian steeple in America.
I found him at work in his rooms, and at once conceded from the specimens scattered about that his genius is indeed profound and authentic.
He will, I believe, be heard from sometime as one of the great decadents for he has crystallized in clay and will one day mirror in marble those nightmares and fantasies which Arthur Machen evokes in prose, and Clark Ashton Smith makes visible in verse and in painting.
Dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he turned languidly at my knock and asked me my business without rising.
When I told him who I was, he displayed some interest for my uncle had excited his curiosity in probing his strange dreams, yet had never explained the reason for the study.
I did not enlarge his knowledge in this regard, but sought with some subtlety to draw him out.
In a short time I became convinced of his absolute sincerity, for he spoke of the dreams in a manner none could mistake.
They and their subconscious residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and he showed me a morbid statue whose contours almost made me shake with the potency of its black suggestion.
He could not recall having seen the original of this thing except in his own dream bas relief, but the outlines had formed themselves insensibly under his hands.
It was, no doubt, the giant shape he had raved of in delirium.
That he really knew nothing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncle's relentless catechism had let fall, he soon made clear and again I strove to think of some way in which he could possibly have received the weird impressions.
He talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion making me see with terrible vividness the damp Cyclopean city of slimy green stone whose geometry, he oddly said, was all wrong and hear with frightened expectancy the ceaseless, half mental calling from underground ''Cthulhu fhtagn,'' ''Cthulhu fhtagn.''
These words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of dead Cthulhu's dream vigil in his stone vault at R'lyeh, and I felt deeply moved despite my rational beliefs.
Wilcox, I was sure, had heard of the cult in some casual way, and had soon forgotten it amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining.
Later, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious expression in dreams, in the bas relief, and in the terrible statue I now beheld so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent one.
The youth was of a type, at once slightly affected and slightly ill mannered, which I could never like but I was willing enough now to admit both his genius and his honesty.
I took leave of him amicably, and wish him all the success his talent promises.
The matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at times I had visions of personal fame from researches into its origin and connections.
I visited New Orleans, talked with Legrasse and others of that old time raiding party, saw the frightful image, and even questioned such of the mongrel prisoners as still survived.
Old Castro, unfortunately, had been dead for some years.
What I now heard so graphically at first hand, though it was really no more than a detailed confirmation of what my uncle had written, excited me afresh for I felt sure that I was on the track of a very real, very secret, and very ancient religion whose discovery would make me an anthropologist of note.
My attitude was still one of absolute materialism, as I wish it still were, and I discounted with almost inexplicable perversity the coincidence of the dream notes and odd cuttings collected by Professor Angell.
One thing which I began to suspect, and which I now fear I know, is that my uncle's death was far from natural.
He fell on a narrow hill street leading up from an ancient waterfront swarming with foreign mongrels, after a careless push from a negro sailor.
I did not forget the mixed blood and marine pursuits of the cult members in Louisiana, and would not be surprized to learn of secret methods and poison needles as ruthless and as anciently known as the cryptic rites and beliefs.
Legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone but in Norway a certain seaman who saw things is dead.
Might not the deeper inquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptor's data have come to sinister ears?
I thing Professor Angell died because he knew too much, or because he was likely to learn too much.
Whether I shall go as he did remains to be seen, for I have learned much now.
If heaven ever wishes to grant me a boon, it will be a total effacing of the results of a mere chance which fixed my eye on a certain stray piece of shelf paper.
It was nothing on which I would naturally have stumbled in the course of my daily round, for it was an old number of an Australian journal, Sydney Bulletin for April 18, 1925.
It had escaped even the cutting bureau which had at the time of its issuance been avidly collecting material for my uncle's research.
I had largely given over my inquiries into what Professor Angell called the ''Cthulhu Cult,'' and was visiting a learned friend of Paterson, New Jersey, the curator of a local museum and a mineralogist of note.
Examining one day the reserve specimens roughly set on the storage shelves in a rear room of the museum, my eye was caught by an odd picture in one of the old papers spread beneath the stones.
It was the Sydney Bulletin I have mentioned, for my friend has wide affiliations in all conceivable foreign parts and the picture was a half tone cut of a hideous stone image almost identical with that which Legrasse had found in the swamp.
Eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, I scanned the item in detail and was disappointed to find it of only moderate length.
What it suggested, however, was of portentous significance to my flagging quest and I carefully tore it out for immediate action.
It read as follows  Vigilant Arrives With Helpless Armed New Zealand Yacht in Tow.
One Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard.
Tale of Desperate Battle and Deaths at Sea.
Rescued Seaman Refuses Particulars of Strange Experience.
Odd Idol Found in His Possession.
Inquiry to Follow.
The Morrison Co.'s freighter Vigilant, bound from Valparaiso, arrived this morning at its wharf in Darling Harbour, having in tow the battled and disabled but heavily armed steam yacht Alert of Dunedin, N. Z., which was sighted April 12th in S. Latitude 34 degrees 21', W. Longitude 152 degrees 17', with one living and one dead man aboard.
The Vigilant left Valparaiso March 25th, and on April 2d was driven considerably south of her course by exceptionally heavy storms and monster waves.
On April 12th the derelict was sighted and though apparently deserted, was found upon boarding to contain one survivor in a half delirious condition and one man who had evidently been dead for more than a week.
The living man was clutching a horrible stone idol of unknown origin, about a foot in height, regarding whose nature authorities at Sydney University, the Royal Society, and the Museum in College Street all profess complete bafflement, and which the survivor says he found in the cabin of the yacht, in a small carved shrine of common pattern.
This man, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly strange story of piracy and slaughter.
He is Gustaf Johansen, a Norwegian of some intelligence, and had been second mate of the two masted schooner Emma of Auckland, which sailed for Callao February 20th, with a complement of eleven men.
The Emma, he says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her course by the great storm of March 1st, and on March 22d, in S. Latitude 49 degrees 51', W. Longitude 128 degrees 34', encountered the Alert, manned by a queer and evil looking crew of Kanakas and half castes.
Being ordered peremptorily to turn back, Capt.
Collins refused whereupon the strange crew began to fire savagely and without warning upon the schooner with a peculiarly heavy battery of brass cannon forming part of the yacht's equipment.
The Emma's men showed fight, says the survivor, and though the schooner began to sink from shots beneath the waterline they managed to heave alongside their enemy and board her, grappling with the savage crew on the yacht's deck, and being forced to kill them all, the number being slightly superior, because of their particularly abhorrent and desperate though rather clumsy mode of fighting.
Three of the Emma's men, including Capt.
Collins and First Mate Green, were killed and the remaining eight under Second Mate Johansen proceeded to navigate the captured yacht, going ahead in their original direction to see if any reason for their ordering back had existed.
The next day, it appears, they raised and landed on a small island, although none is known to exist in that part of the ocean and six of the men somehow died ashore, though Johansen is queerly reticent about this part of his story and speaks only of their falling into a rock chasm.
Later, it seems, he and one companion boarded the yacht and tried to manage her, but were beaten about by the storm of April 2nd.
From that time till his rescue on the 12th, the man remembers little, and he does not even recall when William Briden, his companion, died.
Briden's death reveals no apparent cause, and was probably due to excitement or exposure.
Cable advices from Dunedin report that the Alert was well known there as an island trader, and bore an evil reputation along the waterfront.
It was owned by a curious group of half castes whose frequent meetings and night trips to the woods attracted no little curiosity and it had set sail in great haste just after the storm and earth tremors of March 1st.
Our Auckland correspondent gives the Emma and her crew an excellent reputation, and Johansen is described as a sober and worthy man.
The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whole matter beginning tomorrow, at which every effort will be made to induce Johansen to speak more freely than he has done hitherto.
This was all, together with the picture of the hellish image but what a train of ideas it started in my mind!
Here were new treasuries of data on the Cthulhu Cult, and evidence that it had strange interests at sea as well as on land.
What motive prompted the hybrid crew to order back the Emma as they sailed about with their hideous idol?
What was the unknown island on which six of the Emma's crew had died, and about which the mate Johansen was so secretive?
What had the vice admiralty's investigation brought out, and what was known of the noxious cult in Dunedin?
And most marvelous of all, what deep and more than natural linkage of dates was this which gave a malign and now undeniable significance to the various turns of events so carefully noted by my uncle?
March 1st our February 28th according to the International Date Line the earthquake and storm had come.
From Dunedin the Alert and her noisome crew had darted eagerly forth as if imperiously summoned, and on the other side of the earth poets and artists had begun to dream of a strange, dank Cyclopean city whilst a young sculptor had molded in his sleep the form of the dreaded Cthulhu.
March 23rd the crew of the Emma landed on an unknown island and left six men dead and on that date the dreams of sensitive men assumed a heightened vividness and darkened with dread of a giant monster's malign pursuit, whilst an architect had gone mad and a sculptor had lapsed suddenly into delirium!
And what of this storm of April 2nd the date on which all dreams of the dank city ceased, and Wilcox emerged unharmed from the bondage of strange fever?
What of all this and of those hints of old Castro about the sunken, star born Old Ones and their coming reign their faithful cult and their mastery of dreams?
Was I tottering on the brink of cosmic horrors beyond man's power to bear?
If so, they must be horrors of the mind alone, for in some way the second of April had put a stop to whatever monstrous menace had begun its siege of mankind's soul.
That evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, I bade my host adieu and took a train for San Francisco.
In less than a month I was in Dunedin where, however, I found that little was known of the strange cult members who had lingered in the old sea taverns.
Waterfront scum was far too common for special mention though there was vague talk about one inland trip these mongrels had made, during which faint drumming and red flame were noted on the distant hills.
In Auckland I learned that Johansen had returned with yellow hair turned white after a perfunctory and inconclusive questioning at Sydney, and had thereafter sold his cottage in West Street and sailed with his wife to his old home in Oslo.
Of his stirring experience he would tell his friends no more than he had told the admiralty officials, and all they could do was to give me his Oslo address.
After that I went to Sydney and talked profitlessly with seamen and members of the vice admiralty court.
I saw the Alert, now sold and in commercial use, at Circular Quay in Sydney Cove, but gained nothing from its non committal bulk.
The crouching image with its cuttlefish head, dragon body, scaly wings, and hieroglyphed pedestal, was preserved in the Museum at Hyde Park and I studied it long and well, finding it a thing of balefully exquisite workmanship, and with the same utter mystery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly strangeness of material which I had noted in Legrasse's smaller specimen.
Geologists, the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle for they vowed that the world held no rock like it.
Then I thought with a shudder of what old Castro had told Legrasse about the primal Great Ones ''They had come from the stars, and had brought Their images with Them.''
Shaken with such a mental revolution as I had never before known, I now resolved to visit Mate Johansen in Oslo.
Sailing for London, I re embarked at once for the Norwegian capital and one autumn day landed at the trim wharves in the shadow of the Egeberg.
Johansen's address, I discovered, lay in the Old Town of King Harold Haardrada, which kept alive the name of Oslo during all the centuries that the greater city masqueraded as ''Christiania.''
I made the brief trip by taxicab, and knocked with palpitant heart at the door of a neat and ancient building with plastered front.
A sad faced woman in black answered my summons, and I was stung with disappointment when she told me in halting English that Gustaf Johansen was no more.
He had not long survived his return, said his wife, for the doings at sea in 1925 had broken him.
He had told her no more than he had told the public, but had left a long manuscript of ''technical matters'' as he said written in English, evidently in order to safeguard her from the peril of casual perusal.
During a walk through a narrow lane near the Gothenburg dock, a bundle of papers falling from an attic window had knocked him down.
Two Lascar sailors at once helped him to his feet, but before the ambulance could reach him he was dead.
Physicians found no adequate cause for the end, and laid it to heart trouble and a weakened constitution.
I now felt gnawing at my vitals that dark terror which will never leave me till I, too, am at rest ''accidentally'' or otherwise.
Persuading the widow that my connection with her husband's ''technical matters'' was sufficient to entitle me to his manuscript, I bore the document away and began to read it on the London boat.
It was a simple, rambling thing a naive sailor's effort at a post facto diary and strove to recall day by day that last awful voyage.
I can not attempt to transcribe it verbatim in all its cloudiness and redundance, but I will tell its gist enough to show why the sound of the water against the vessel's sides became so unendurable to me that I stopped my ears with cotton.
Johansen, thank God, did not know quite all, even though he saw the city and the Thing, but I shall never sleep calmly again when I think of the horrors that lurk ceaselessly behind life in time and in space, and of those unhallowed blasphemies from elder stars which dream beneath the sea, known and favored by a nightmare cult ready and eager to loose them on the world whenever another earthquake shall heave their monstrous stone city again to the sun and air.
Johansen's voyage had begun just as he told it to the vice admiralty.
The Emma, in ballast, had cleared Auckland on February 20th, and had felt the full force of that earthquake born tempest which must have heaved up from the sea bottom the horrors that filled men's dreams.
Once more under control, the ship was making good progress when held up by the Alert on March 22nd, and I could feel the mate's regret as he wrote of her bombardment and sinking.
Of the swarthy cult fiends on the Alert he speaks with significant horror.
There was some peculiarly abominable quality about them which made their destruction seem almost a duty, and Johansen shows ingenuous wonder at the charge of ruthlessness brought against his party during the proceedings of the court of inquiry.
Then, driven ahead by curiosity in their captured yacht under Johansen's command, the men sight a great stone pillar sticking out of the sea, and in S. Latitude 47 degrees 9', W. Longitude 126 degrees 43' come upon a coastline of mingled mud, ooze, and weedy Cyclopean masonry which can be nothing less than the tangible substance of earth's supreme terror the nightmare corpse city of R'lyeh, that was built in measureless eons behind history by the vast, loathsome shapes that seeped down from the dark stars.
There lay great Cthulhu and his hordes, hidden in green slimy vaults and sending out at last, after cycles incalculable, the thoughts that spread fear to the dreams of the sensitive and called imperiously to the faithful to come on a pilgrimage of liberation and restoration.
All this Johansen did not suspect, but God knows he soon saw enough!
I suppose that only a single mountain top, the hideous monolith crowned citadel whereon great Cthulhu was buried, actually emerged from the waters.
When I think of the extent of all that may be brooding down there I almost wish to kill myself forthwith.
Johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic majesty of this dripping Babylon of elder demons, and must have guessed without guidance that it was nothing of this or of any sane planet.
Awe at the unbelievable size of the greenish stone blocks, at the dizzying height of the great carven monolith, and at the stupefying identity of the colossal statues and bas reliefs with the queer image found in the shrine on the Alert, is poignantly visible in every line of the mate's frightened description.
Without knowing what futurism is like, Johansen achieved something very close to it when he spoke of the city for instead of describing any definite structure or building, he dwells only on the broad impressions of vast angles and stone surfaces surfaces too great to belong to anything right or proper for this earth, and impious with horrible images and hieroglyphs.
I mention his talk about angles because it suggests something Wilcox had told me of his awful dreams.
He had said that the geometry of the dream place he saw was abnormal, non Euclidean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from ours.
Now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazing at the terrible reality.
Johansen and his men landed at a sloping mud bank on this monstrous Acropolis, and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy blocks which could have been no mortal staircase.
The very sun of heaven seemed distorted when viewed through the polarizing miasma welling out from this sea soaked perversion, and twisted menace and suspense lurked leeringly in those crazily elusive angles of carven rock where a second glance showed concavity after the first showed convexity.
Something very like fright had come over all the explorers before anything more definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen.
Each would have fled had he not feared the scorn of the others, and it was only half heartedly that they searched vainly, as it proved for some portable souvenir to bear away.
It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolith and shouted of what he had found.
The rest followed him, and looked curiously at the immense carved door with the now familiar squid dragon bas relief.
It was, Johansen said, like a great barn door and they all felt that it was a door because of the ornate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, though they could not decide whether it lay flat like a trap door or slantwise like an outside cellar door.
As Wilcox would have said, the geometry of the place was all wrong.
One could not be sure that the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence the relative position of everything else seemed fantasmally variable.
Briden pushed at the stone in several places without result.
Then Donovan felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing each point separately as he went.
He climbed interminably along the grotesque stone molding that is, one would call it climbing if the thing was not after all horizontal and the men wondered how any door in the universe could be so vast.
Then, very softly and slowly, the acre great panel began to give inward at the top and they saw that it was balanced.
Donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and rejoined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of the monstrously carven portal.
In this fantasy of prismatic distortion it moved anomalously in a diagonal way, so that all the rules of matter and perspective seemed upset.
The aperture was black with a darkness almost material.
That tenebrousness was indeed a positive quality for it obscured such parts of the inner walls as ought to have been revealed, and actually burst forth like smoke from its eon long imprisonment, visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away into the shrunken and gibbous sky on flapping membranous wings.
The odor arising from the newly opened depths was intolerable, and at length the quick eared Hawkins thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound down there.
Everyone listened, and everyone was listening still when It lumbered slobberingly into sight and gropingly squeezed Its gelatinous green immensity through the black doorway into the tainted outside air of that poison city of madness.
Poor Johansen's handwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this.
Of the six men who never reached the ship, he thinks two perished of pure fright in that accursed instant.
The Thing can not be described there is no language for such abysms of shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions of all matter, force, and cosmic order.
A mountain walked or stumbled.
God!
What wonder that across the earth a great architect went mad, and poor Wilcox raved with fever in that telepathic instant?
The Thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn of the stars, had awaked to claim his own.
The stars were right again, and what an age old cult had failed to do by design, a band of innocent sailors had done by accident.
After vigintillions of years great Cthulhu was loose again, and ravening for delight.
Three men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody turned.
God rest them, if there be any rest in the universe.
They were Donovan, Guerrera and Angstrom.
Parker slipped as the other three were plunging frenziedly over endless vistas of green crusted rock to the boat, and Johansen swears he was swallowed up by an angle of masonry which shouldn't have been there an angle which was acute, but behaved as if it were obtuse.
So only Briden and Johansen reached the boat, and pulled desperately for the Alert as the mountainous monstrosity flopped down the slimy stones and hesitated floundering at the edge of the water.
Steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departure of all hands for the shore and it was the work of only a few moments of feverish rushing up and down between wheels and engines to get the Alert under way.
Slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribable scene, she began to churn the lethal waters whilst on the masonry of that charnel shore that was not of earth the titan Thing from the stars slavered and gibbered like Polypheme cursing the fleeing ship of Odysseus.
Then, bolder than the storied Cyclops, great Cthulhu slid greasily into the water and began to pursue with vast wave raising strokes of cosmic potency.
Briden looked back and went mad, laughing shrilly as he kept on laughing at intervals till death found him one night in the cabin whilst Johansen was wandering deliriously.
But Johansen had not given out yet.
Knowing that the Thing could surely overtake the Alert until steam was fully up, he resolved on a desperate chance and, setting the engine for full speed, ran lightning like on deck and reversed the wheel.
There was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as the steam mounted higher and higher the brave Norwegian drove his vessel head on against the pursuing jelly which rose above the unclean froth like the stern of a demon galleon.
The awful squid head with writhing feelers came nearly up to the bowsprit of the sturdy yacht, but Johansen drove on relentlessly.
There was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastiness as of a cloven sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened graves, and a sound that the chronicler would not put on paper.
For an instant the ship was befouled by an acrid and blinding green cloud, and then there was only a venomous seething astern where God in heaven!
the scattered plasticity of that nameless sky spawn was nebulously recombining in its hateful original form, whilst its distance widened every second as the Alert gained impetus from its mounting steam.
That was all.
After that Johansen only brooded over the idol in the cabin and attended to a few matters of food for himself and the laughing maniac by his side.
He did not try to navigate after the first bold flight, for the reaction had taken something out of his soul.
Then came the storm of April 2nd, and a gathering of the clouds about his consciousness.
There is a sense of spectral whirling through liquid gulfs of infinity, of dizzying rides through reeling universes on a comet's tail, and of hysterical plunges from the pit to the moon and from the moon back again to the pit, all livened by a cachinnating chorus of the distorted, hilarious elder gods and the green, bat winged mocking imps of Tartarus.
Out of that dream came rescue the Vigilant, the vice admiralty court, the streets of Dunedin, and the long voyage back home to the old house by the Egeberg.
He could not tell they would think him mad.
He would write of what he knew before death came, but his wife must not guess.
Death would be a boon if only it could blot out the memories.
That was the document I read, and now I have placed it in the tin box beside the bas relief and the papers of Professor Angell.
With it shall go this record of mine this test of my own sanity, wherein is pieced together that which I hope may never be pieced together again.
I have looked upon all that the universe has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me.
But I do not think my life will be long.
As my uncle went, as poor Johansen went, so I shall go.
I know too much, and the cult still lives.
Cthulhu still lives, too, I suppose, again in that chasm of stone which has shielded him since the sun was young.
His accursed city is sunken once more, for the Vigilant sailed over the spot after the April storm but his ministers on earth still bellow and prance and slay around idol capped monoliths in lonely places.
He must have been trapped by the sinking whilst within his black abyss, or else the world would by now be screaming with fright and frenzy.
Who knows the end?
What has risen may sink, and what has sunk may rise.
Loathsomeness waits and dreams in the deep, and decay spreads over the tottering cities of men.
A time will come but I must not and can not think!
Let me pray that, if I do not survive this manuscript, my executors may put caution before audacity and see that it meets no other eye.
It is true that I have sent six bullets through the head of my best friend, and yet I hope to show by this statement that I am not his murderer.
At first I shall be called a madman madder than the man I shot in his cell at the Arkham Sanitarium.
Later some of my readers will weigh each statement, correlate it with the known facts, and ask themselves how I could have believed otherwise than as I did after facing the evidence of that horror that thing on the door step.
Until then I also saw nothing but madness in the wild tales I have acted on.
Even now I ask myself whether I was misled or whether I am not mad after all.
I do not know but others have strange things to tell of Edward and Asenath Derby, and even the stolid police are at their wits' ends to account for that last terrible visit.
They have tried weakly to concoct a theory of a ghastly jest or warning by discharged servants yet they know in their hearts that the truth is something infinitely more terrible and incredible.
So I say that I have not murdered Edward Derby.
Rather have I avenged him, and in so doing purged the earth of a horror whose survival might have loosed untold terrors on all mankind.
There are black zones of shadow close to our daily paths, and now and then some evil soul breaks a passage through.
When that happens, the man who knows must strike before reckoning the consequences.
I have known Edward Pickman Derby all his life.
Eight years my junior, he was so precocious that we had much in common from the time he was eight and I sixteen.
He was the most phenomenal child scholar I have ever known, and at seven was writing verse of a somber, fantastic, almost morbid cast which astonished the tutors surrounding him.
Perhaps his private education and coddled seclusion had something to do with his premature flowering.
An only child, he had organic weaknesses which startled his doting parents and caused them to keep him closely chained to their side.
He was never allowed out without his nurse, and seldom had a chance to play unconstrainedly with other children.
All this doubtless fostered a strange secretive inner life in the boy, with imagination as his one avenue of freedom.
At any rate, his juvenile learning was prodigious and bizarre and his facile writings such as to captivate me despite my greater age.
About that time I had leanings toward art of a somewhat grotesque cast, and I found in this younger child a rare kindred spirit.
What lay behind our joint love of shadows and marvels was, no doubt, the ancient, moldering, and subtly fearsome town in which we lived witch cursed, legend haunted Arkham, whose huddled, sagging gambrel roofs and crumbling Georgian balustrades brood out the centuries beside the darkly muttering Miskatonic.
As time went by I turned to architecture and gave up my design of illustrating a book of Edward's demoniac poems, yet our comradeship suffered no lessening.
Young Derby's odd genius developed remarkably, and in his eighteenth year his collected nightmare lyrics made a real sensation when issued under the title Azathoth and Other Horrors.
He was a close correspondent of the notorious Baudelairean poet Justin Geoffrey, who wrote The People of the Monolith and died screaming in a madhouse in 1926 after a visit to a sinister, ill regarded village in Hungary.
In self reliance and practical affairs, however, Derby was greatly retarded because of his coddled existence.
His health had improved, but his habits of childish dependence were fostered by over careful parents, so that he never traveled alone, made independent decisions, or assumed responsibilities.
It was early seen that he would not be equal to a struggle in the business or professional arena, but the family fortune was so ample that this formed no tragedy.
As he grew to years of manhood he retained a deceptive aspect of boyishness.
Blond and blue eyed, he had the fresh complexion of a child, and his attempts to raise a mustache were discernible only with difficulty.
His voice was soft and light, and his unexercised life gave him a juvenile chubbiness rather than the paunchiness of premature middle age.
He was of good height, and his handsome face would have made him a notable gallant had not his shyness held him to seclusion and bookishness.
Derby's parents took him abroad every summer, and he was quick to seize on the surface aspects of European thought and expression.
His Poe like talents turned more and more toward the decadent, and other artistic sensitivenesses and yearnings were half aroused in him.
We had great discussions in those days.
I had been through Harvard, had studied in a Boston architect's office, had married, and had finally returned to Arkham to practise my profession settling in the family homestead in Salton stall Street, since my father had moved to Florida for his health.
Edward used to call almost every evening, till I came to regard him as one of the household.
He had a characteristic way of ringing the door bell or sounding the knocker that grew to be a veritable code signal, so that after dinner I always listened for the familiar three brisk strokes followed by two more after a pause.
Less frequently I would visit at his house and note with envy the obscure volumes in his constantly growing library.
Derby went through Miskatonic University in Arkham, since his parents would not let him board away from them.
He entered at sixteen and completed his course in three years, majoring in English and French literature and receiving high marks in everything but mathematics and the sciences.
He mingled very little with the other students, though looking enviously at the ''daring'' or ''Bohemian'' set whose superficially ''smart'' language and meaninglessly ironic pose he aped, and whose dubious conduct he wished he dared adopt.
What he did do was to become an almost fanatical devotee of subterranean magical lore, for which Miskatonic's library was and is famous.
Always a dweller on the surface of fantasy and strangeness, he now delved deep into the actual runes and riddles left by a fabulous past for the guidance or puzzlement of posterity.
He read things like the frightful Book of Eibon, the Unaussprechlichen Kulten of von Junzt, and the forbidden Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred, though he did not tell his parents he had seen them.
Edward was twenty when my son and only child was born, and seemed pleased when I named the newcomer Edward Derby Upton, after him.
By the time he was twenty five Edward Derby was a prodigiously learned man and a fairly well known poet and fantaisiste, though his lack of contacts and responsibilities had slowed down his literary growth by making his products derivative and over bookish.
I was perhaps his closest friend finding him an inexhaustible mine of vital theoretical topics, while he relied on me for advice in whatever matters he did not wish to refer to his parents.
He remained single more through shyness, inertia and parental protectiveness than through inclination and moved in society only to the slightest and most perfunctory extent.
When the war came both health and ingrained timidity kept him at home.
I went to Plattsburg for a commission, but never got overseas.
So the years wore on.
Edward's mother died when he was thirty four, and for months he was incapacitated by some odd psychological malady.
His father took him to Europe, however, and he managed to pull out of his trouble without visible effects.
Afterward he seemed to feel a sort of grotesque exhilaration, as if of partial escape from some unseen bondage.
He began to mingle in the more ''advanced'' college set despite his middle age, and was present at some extremely wild doings on one occasion paying heavy blackmail which he borrowed of me to keep his presence at a certain affair from his father's notice.
Some of the whispered rumors about the wild Miskatonic set were extremely singular.
There was even talk of black magic and of happenings utterly beyond credibility.
Edward was thirty eight when he met Asenath Waite.
She was, I judge, about twenty three at the time and was taking a special course in mediaeval meta physics at Miskatonic.
The daughter of a friend of mine had met her before in the Hall School at Kingsport and had been inclined to shun her because of her odd reputation.
She was dark, smallish, and very good looking except for over protuberant eyes but something in her expression alienated extremely sensitive people.
It was, however, largely her origin and conversation which caused average folk to avoid her.
She was one of the Innsmouth Waites, and dark legends have clustered for generations about crumbling, half deserted Innsmouth and its people.
There are tales of horrible bargains about the year 1850, and of a strange element ''not quite human'' in the ancient families of the run down fishing port tales such as only old time Yankees can devise and repeat with proper awesomeness.
Asenath's case was aggravated by the fact that she was Ephraim Waite's daughter the child of his old age by an unknown wife who always went veiled.
Ephraim lived in a half decayed mansion in Washington Street, Innsmouth, and those who had seen the place Arkham folk avoid going to Innsmouth whenever they can declared that the attic windows were always boarded, and that strange sounds sometimes floated from within as evening drew on.
The old man was known to have been a prodigious magical student in his day, and legend averred that he could raise or quell storms at sea according to his whim.
I had seen him once or twice in my youth as he came to Arkham to consult forbidden tomes at the college library, and had hated his wolfish, saturnine face with its tangle of iron gray beard.
He had died insane under rather queer circumstances just before his daughter by his will made a nominal ward of the principal entered the Hall School, but she had been his morbidly avid pupil and looked fiendishly like him at times.
The friend whose daughter had gone to school with Asenath Waite repeated many curious things when the news of Edward's acquaintance with her began to spread about.
Asenath, it seemed, had posed as a kind of magician at school and had really seemed able to accomplish some highly baffling marvels.
She professed to be able to raise thunderstorms, though her seeming success was generally laid to some uncanny knack at prediction.
All animals markedly disliked her, and she could make any dog howl by certain motions of her right hand.
There were times when she displayed snatches of knowledge and language very singular and very shocking for a young girl when she would frighten her schoolmates with leers and winks of an inexplicable kind, and would seem to extract an obscene and zestful irony from her present situation.
Most unusual, though, were the well attested cases of her influence over other persons.
She was, beyond question, a genuine hypnotist.
By gazing peculiarly at a fellow student she would often give the latter a distinct feeling of exchanged personality as if the subject were placed momentarily in the magician's body and able to stare half across the room at her real body, whose eyes blazed and protruded with an alien expression.
Asenath often made wild claims about the nature of consciousness and about its independence of the physical frame or at least from the life processes of the physical frame.
Her crowning rage, however, was that she was not a man since she believed a male brain had certain unique and far reaching cosmic powers.
Given a man's brain, she declared, she could not only equal but surpass her father in mastery of unknown forces.
Edward met Asenath at a gathering of ''intelligentsia'' held in one of the students' rooms, and could talk of nothing else when he came to see me the next day.
He had found her full of the interests and erudition which engrossed him most, and was in addition wildly taken with her appearance.
I had never seen the young woman, and recalled casual references only faintly, but I knew who she was.
It seemed rather regrettable that Derby should become so upheaved about her but I said nothing to discourage him, since infatuation thrives on opposition.
He was not, he said, mentioning her to his father.
In the next few weeks I heard of very little but Asenath from young Derby.
Others now remarked Edward's autumnal gallantry, though they agreed that he did not look even nearly his actual age, or seem at all inappropriate as an escort for his bizarre divinity.
He was only a trifle paunchy despite his indolence and self indulgence, and his face was absolutely without lines.
Asenath, on the other hand, had the premature crow's feet which come from the exercise of an intense will.
About this time Edward brought the girl to call on me, and I at once saw that his interest was by no means one sided.
She eyed him continually with an almost predatory air, and I perceived that their intimacy was beyond untangling.
Soon afterward I had a visit from old Mr. Derby, whom I had always admired and respected.
He had heard the tales of his son's new friendship and had wormed the whole truth out of ''the boy''.
Edward meant to marry Asenath, and had even been looking at houses in the suburbs.
Knowing my usually great influence with his son, the father wondered if I could help to break the ill advised affair off but I regretfully expressed my doubts.
This time it was not a question of Edward's weak will but of the woman's strong will.
The perennial child had transferred his dependence from the parental image to a new and stronger image, and nothing could be done about it.
The wedding was performed a month later by a justice of the peace according to the bride's request.
Mr. Derby, at my advice, offered no opposition, and he, my wife, my son and I attended the brief ceremony the other guests being wild young people from the college.
Asenath had bought the old Crowninshield place in the country at the end of High Street, and they proposed to settle there after a short trip to Innsmouth, whence three servants and some books and household goods were to be brought.
It was probably not so much consideration for Edward and his father as a personal wish to be near the college, its library, and its crowd of ''sophisticates'', that made Asenath settle in Arkham instead of returning permanently home.
When Edward called on me after the honeymoon I thought he looked slightly changed.
Asenath had made him get rid of the undeveloped mustache, but there was more than that.
He looked soberer and more thoughtful, his habitual pout of childish rebelliousness being exchanged for a look almost of genuine sadness.
I was puzzled to decide whether I liked or disliked the change.
Certainly he seemed for the moment more normally adult than ever before.
Perhaps the marriage was a good thing might not the change of dependence form a start toward actual neutralization, leading ultimately to responsible independence?
He came alone, for Asenath was very busy.
She had brought a vast store of books and apparatus from Innsmouth Derby shuddered as he spoke the name, and was finishing the restoration of the Crowninshield house and grounds.
Her home in that town was a rather disgusting place, but certain objects in it had taught him some surprizing things.
He was progressing fast in esoteric lore now that he had Asenath's guidance.
Some of the experiments she proposed were very daring and radical he did not feel at liberty to describe them but he had confidence in her powers and intentions.
The three servants were very queer an incredibly aged couple who had been with old Ephraim and referred occasionally to him and to Asenath's dead mother in a cryptic way, and a swarthy young wench who had marked anomalies of feature and seemed to exude a perpetual odor of fish.
For the next two years I saw less and less of Derby.
A fortnight would sometimes slip by without the familiar three and two strokes at the front door and when he did call or when, as happened with increasing infrequency, I called on him he was very little disposed to converse on vital topics.
He had become secretive about those occult studies which he used to describe and discuss so minutely, and preferred not to talk of his wife.
She had aged tremendously since her marriage, till now oddly enough she seemed the elder of the two.
Her face held the most concentratedly determined expression I had ever seen, and her whole aspect seemed to gain a vague, unplaceable repulsiveness.
My wife and son noticed it as much as I, and we all ceased gradually to call on her for which, Edward admitted in one of his boyishly tactless moments, she was unmitigatedly grateful.
Occasionally the Derbys would go on long trips ostensibly to Europe, though Edward sometimes hinted at obscurer destinations.
It was after the first year that people began talking about the change in Edward Derby.
It was very casual talk, for the change was purely psychological but it brought up some interesting points.
Now and then, it seemed, Edward was observed to wear an expression and to do things wholly incompatible with his usual flabby nature.
For example although in the old days he could not drive a car, he was now seen occasionally to dash into or out of the old Crowninshield driveway with Asenath's powerful Packard, handling it like a master, and meeting traffic entanglements with a skill and determination utterly alien to his accustomed nature.
In such cases he seemed always to be just back from some trip or just starting on one what sort of trip, no one could guess, although he mostly favored the Innsmouth road.
Oddly, the metamorphosis did not seem altogether pleasing.
People said he looked too much like his wife, or like old Ephraim Waite himself, in these moments or perhaps these moments seemed unnatural because they were so rare.
Sometimes, hours after starting out in this way, he would return listlessly sprawled on the rear seat of the car while an obviously hired chauffeur or mechanic drove.
Also, his preponderant aspect on the streets or during his decreasing round of social contacts including, I may say, his calls on me was the old time indecisive one its irresponsible childishness even more marked than in the past.
While Asenath's face aged, Edward's aside from those exceptional occasions actually relaxed into a kind of exaggerated immaturity, save when a trace of the new sadness or understanding would flash across it.
It was really very puzzling.
Meanwhile the Derbys almost dropped out of the gay college circle not through their own disgust, we heard, but because something about their present studies shocked even the most callous of the other decadents.
It was in the third year of the marriage that Edward began to hint openly to me of a certain fear and dissatisfaction.
He would let fall remarks about things ''going too far'', and would talk darkly about the need of ''gaining his identity''.
At first I ignored such references, but in time I began to question him guardedly, remembering what my friend's daughter had said about Asenath's hypnotic influence over the other girls at school the cases where students had thought they were in her body looking across the room at themselves.
This questioning seemed to make him at once alarmed and grateful, and once he mumbled something about having a serious talk with me later.
About this time old Mr. Derby died, for which I was afterward very thankful.
Edward was badly upset, though by no means disorganized.
He had seen astonishingly little of his parent since his marriage, for Asenath had concentrated in herself all his vital sense of family linkage.
Some called him callous in his loss especially since those jaunty and confident moods with the car began to increase.
He now wished to move back into the old family mansion, but Asenath insisted on staying in the Crowninshield house, to which she had become well adjusted.
Not long afterward my wife heard a curious thing from a friend one of the few who had not dropped the Derbys.
She had been out to the end of High Street to call on the couple, and had seen a car shoot briskly out of the drive with Edward's oddly confident and almost sneering face above the wheel.
Ringing the bell, she had been told by the repulsive wench that Asenath was also out but had chanced to look up at the house in leaving.
There, at one of Edward's library windows, she had glimpsed a hastily withdrawn face a face whose expression of pain, defeat, and wistful hopelessness was poignant beyond description.
It was incredibly enough in view of its usual domineering cast Asenath's yet the caller had vowed that in that instant the sad, muddled eyes of poor Edward were gazing out from it.
Edward's calls now grew a trifle more frequent, and his hints occasionally became concrete.
What he said was not to be believed, even in centuried and legend haunted Arkham but he threw out his dark lore with a sincerity and convincingness which made one fear for his sanity.
He talked about terrible meetings in lonely places, of cyclopean ruins in the heart of the Maine woods beneath which vast staircases led down to abysses of nighted secrets, of complex angles that led through invisible walls to other regions of space and time, and of hideous exchanges of personality that permitted explorations in remote and forbidden places, on other worlds, and in different space time continua.
He would now and then back up certain crazy hints by exhibiting objects which utterly nonplussed me elusively colored and bafflingly textured objects like nothing ever heard of on earth, whose insane curves and surfaces answered no conceivable purpose and followed no conceivable geometry.
These things, he said, came ''from outside'' and his wife knew how to get them.
Sometimes but always in frightened and ambiguous whispers he would suggest things about old Ephraim Waite, whom he had seen occasionally at the college library in the old days.
These adumbrations were never specific, but seemed to revolve around some especially horrible doubt as to whether the old wizard were really dead in a spiritual as well as corporeal sense.
At times Derby would halt abruptly in his revelations, and I wondered whether Asenath could possibly have divined his speech at a distance and cut him off through some unknown sort of telepathic mesmerism some power of the kind she had displayed at school.
Certainly, she suspected that he told me things, for as the weeks passed she tried to stop his visits with words and glances of a most inexplicable potency.
Only with difficulty could he get to see me, for although he would pretend to be going somewhere else, some invisible force would generally clog his motions or make him forget his destination for the time being.
His visits usually came when Asenath was away ''away in her own body,'' as he once oddly put it.
She always found out later the servants watched his goings and comings but evidently she thought it inexpedient to do anything drastic.
Derby had been married more than three years on that August day when I got that telegram from Maine.
I had not seen him for two months, but had heard he was away ''on business''.
Asenath was supposed to be with him, though watchful gossip declared there was someone upstairs in the house behind the doubly curtained windows.
They had watched the purchases made by the servants.
And now the town marshal of Chesuncook had wired of the draggled madman who stumbled out of the woods with delirious ravings and screamed to me for protection.
It was Edward and he had been just able to recall his own name and address.
Chesuncook is close to the wildest, deepest, and least explored forest belt in Maine, and it took a whole day of feverish jolting through fantastic and forbidding scenery to get there in a car.
I found Derby in a cell at the town farm, vacillating between frenzy and apathy.
He knew me at once, and began pouring out a meaningless, half incoherent torrent of words in my direction.
''Dan for God's sake!
The pit of the shoggoths!
Down the six thousand steps ... the abomination of abominations....
I never would let her take me, and then I found myself there Ia!
Shub Niggurath!
The shape rose up from the altar, and there were five hundred that howled the Hooded Thing bleated 'Kamog!
Kamog!'
that was old Ephraim's secret name in the coven I was there, where she promised she wouldn't take me A minute before I was locked in the library, and then I was there where she had gone with my body in the place of utter blasphemy, the unholy pit where the black realm begins and the watcher guards the gate I saw a shoggoth it changed shape I can't stand it I'll kill her if she ever sends me there again I'll kill that entity her, him, it I'll kill it!
I'll kill it with my own hands!''
Illustration ''The pit of the shoggoths!
Down the six thousand steps ... the abomination of abominations.''
It took me an hour to quiet him, but he subsided at last.
The next day I got him decent clothes in the village, and set out with him for Arkham.
His fury of hysteria was spent, and he was inclined to be silent, though he began muttering darkly to himself when the car passed through Augusta as if the sight of a city aroused unpleasant memories.
It was clear that he did not wish to go home and considering the fantastic delusions he seemed to have about his wife delusions undoubtedly springing from some actual hypnotic ordeal to which he had been subjected I thought it would be better if he did not.
I would, I resolved, put him up myself for a time, no matter what unpleasantness it would make with Asenath.
Later I would help him get a divorce, for most assuredly there were mental factors which made this marriage suicidal for him.
When we struck open country again Derby's muttering faded away, and I let him nod and drowse on the seat beside me as I drove.
During our sunset dash through Portland the muttering commenced again, more distinctly than before, and as I listened I caught a stream of utterly insane drivel about Asenath.
The extent to which she had preyed on Edward's nerves was plain, for he had woven a whole set of hallucinations around her.
His present predicament, he mumbled furtively, was only one of a long series.
She was getting hold of him, and he knew that some day she would never let go.
Even now she probably let him go only when she had to, because she couldn't hold on long at a time.
She constantly took his body and went to nameless places for nameless rites, leaving him in her body and locking him upstairs but sometimes she couldn't hold on, and he would find himself suddenly in his own body again in some far off, horrible and perhaps unknown place.
Sometimes she'd get hold of him again and sometimes she couldn't.
Often he was left stranded somewhere as I had found him time and again he had to find his way home from frightful distances, getting somebody to drive the car after he found it.
The worst thing was that she was holding on to him longer and longer at a time.
She wanted to be a man to be fully human that was why she got hold of him.
She had sensed the mixture of fine wrought brain and weak will in him.
Some day she would crowd him out and disappear with his body disappear to become a great magician like her father and leave him marooned in that female shell that wasn't even quite human.
Yes, he knew about the Innsmouth blood now.
There had been traffic with things from the sea it was horrible.... And old Ephraim he had known the secret, and when he grew old did a hideous thing to keep alive he wanted to live for ever Asenath would succeed one successful demonstration had taken place already.
As Derby muttered on I turned to look at him closely, verifying the impression of change which an earlier scrutiny had given me.
Paradoxically, he seemed in better shape than usual harder, more normally developed, and without the trace of sickly flabbiness caused by his indolent habits.
It was as if he had been really active and properly exercised for the first time in his coddled life, and I judged that Asenath's force must have pushed him into unwonted channels of motion and alertness.
But just now his mind was in a pitiable state for he was mumbling wild extravagances about his wife, about black magic, about old Ephraim, and about some revelation which would convince even me.
He repeated names which I recognized from bygone browsings in forbidden volumes, and at times made me shudder with a certain thread of mythological consistency of convincing coherence which ran through his maundering.
Again and again he would pause, as if to gather courage for some final and terrible disclosure.
''Dan, Dan, don't you remember him the wild eyes and the unkempt beard that never turned white?
He glared at me once, and I never forgot it.
Now she glares that way.
And I know why!
He found it in the Necronomicon the formula.
I don't dare tell you the page yet, but when I do you can read and understand.
Then you will know what has engulfed me.
On, on, on, on body to body to body he means never to die.
The life glow he knows how to break the link ... it can flicker on a while even when the body is dead.
I'll give you hints and maybe you'll guess.
Listen, Dan do you know why my wife always takes such pains with that silly back hand writing?
Have you ever seen a manuscript of old Ephraim's?
Do you want to know why I shivered when I saw some hasty notes Asenath had jotted down?
''Asenath is there such a person?
Why did they half think there was poison in old Ephraim's stomach?
Why do the Gilmans whisper about the way he shrieked like a frightened child when he went mad and Asenath locked him up in the padded attic room where the other had been?
Was it old Ephraim's soul that was locked in?
Who locked in whom?
Why had he been looking for months for someone with a fine mind and a weak will?
Why did he curse that his daughter wasn't a son?
Tell me, Daniel Upton what devilish exchange was perpetrated in the house of horror where that blasphemous monster had his trusting, weak willed, half human child at his mercy?
Didn't he make it permanent as she'll do in the end with me?
Tell me why that thing that calls itself Asenath writes differently off guard, so that you can't tell its script from  ''  Then the thing happened.
Derby's voice was rising to a thin treble scream as he raved, when suddenly it was shut off with an almost mechanical click.
I thought of those other occasions at my home when his confidences had abruptly ceased when I had half fancied that some obscure telepathic wave of Asenath's mental force was intervening to keep him silent.
This, though, was something altogether different and, I felt, infinitely more horrible.
The face beside me was twisted almost unrecognizably for a moment, while through the whole body there passed a shivering motion as if all the bones, organs, muscles, nerves, and glands were re adjusting themselves to a radically different posture, set of stresses, and general personality.
Just where the supreme horror lay, I could not for my life tell yet there swept over me such a swamping wave of sickness and repulsion such a freezing, petrifying sense of utter alienage and abnormality that my grasp of the wheel grew feeble and uncertain.
The figure beside me seemed less like a life long friend than like some monstrous intrusion from outer space some damnable, utterly accursed focus of unknown and malign cosmic forces.
I had faltered only a moment, but before another moment was over my companion had seized the wheel and forced me to change places with him.
The dusk was now very thick, and the lights of Portland far behind so I could not see much of his face.
The blaze of his eyes, though, was phenomenal and I knew that he must now be in that queerly energized state so unlike his usual self which so many people had noticed.
It seemed odd and incredible that listless Edward Derby he who could never assert himself, and who had never learned to drive should be ordering me about and taking the wheel of my own car yet that was precisely what had happened.
He did not speak for some time, and in my inexplicable horror I was glad he did not.
In the lights of Biddeford and Saco I saw his firmly set mouth, and shivered at the blaze of his eyes.
The people were right he did look damnably like his wife and like old Ephraim when in these moods.
I did not wonder that the moods were disliked there was certainly something unnatural in them, and I felt the sinister element all the more because of the wild ravings I had been hearing.
This man, for all my life long knowledge of Edward Pickman Derby, was a stranger an intrusion of some sort from the black abyss.
He did not speak until we were on a dark stretch of road, and when he did his voice seemed utterly unfamiliar.
It was deeper, firmer, and more decisive than I had ever known it to be while its accent and pronunciation were altogether changed though vaguely, remotely, and rather disturbingly recalling something I could not quite place.
There was, I thought, a trace of very profound and very genuine irony in the timbre not the flashy, meaninglessly jaunty pseudo irony of the callow ''sophisticate'', which Derby had habitually affected, but something grim, basic, pervasive, and potentially evil.
I marveled at the self possession so soon following the spell of panic struck muttering.
''I hope you'll forget my attack back there, Upton,'' he was saying.
''You know what my nerves are, and I guess you can excuse such things.
I'm enormously grateful, of course, for this lift home.
''And you must forget, too, any crazy things I may have been saying about my wife and about things in general.
That's what comes from overstudy in a field like mine.
My philosophy is full of bizarre concepts, and when the mind gets worn out it cooks up all sorts of imaginary concrete applications.
I shall take a rest from now on you probably won't see me for some time, and you needn't blame Asenath for it.
''This trip was a bit queer, but it's really very simple.
There are certain Indian relics in the north woods standing stones, and all that which mean a good deal in folklore, and Asenath and I are following that stuff up.
It was a hard search, so I seem to have gone off my head.
I must send somebody for the car when I get home.
A month's relaxation will put me on my feet.''
I do not recall just what my own part of the conversation was, for the baffling alienage of my seatmate filled all my consciousness.
With every moment my feeling of elusive cosmic horror increased, till at length I was in a virtual delirium of longing for the end of the drive.
Derby did not offer to relinquish the wheel, and I was glad of the speed with which Portsmouth and Newburyport flashed by.
At the junction where the main highway runs inland and avoids Innsmouth, I was half afraid my driver would take the bleak shore road that goes through that damnable place.
He did not, however, but darted rapidly past Rowley and Ipswich toward our destination.
We reached Arkham before midnight, and found the lights still on at the old Crowninshield house.
Derby left the car with a hasty repetition of his thanks, and I drove home alone with a curious feeling of relief.
It had been a terrible drive all the more terrible because I could not quite tell why and I did not regret Derby's forecast of a long absence from my company.
The next two months were full of rumors.
People spoke of seeing Derby more and more in his new energized state, and Asenath was scarcely ever in to her callers.
I had only one visit from Edward, when he called briefly in Asenath's car duly reclaimed from wherever he had left it in Maine to get some books he had lent me.
He was in his new state, and paused only long enough for some evasively polite remarks.
It was plain that he had nothing to discuss with me when in this condition and I noticed that he did not even trouble to give the old three and two signal when ringing the door bell.
As on that evening in the car, I felt a faint, infinitely deep horror which I could not explain so that his swift departure was a prodigious relief.
In mid September Derby was away for a week, and some of the decadent college set talked knowingly of the matter hinting at a meeting with a notorious cult leader, lately expelled from England, who had established head quarters in New York.
For my part I could not get that strange ride from Maine out of my head.
The transformation I had witnessed had affected me profoundly, and I caught myself again and again trying to account for the thing and for the extreme horror it had inspired in me.
But the oddest rumors were those about the sobbing in the old Crowninshield house.
The voice seemed to be a woman's, and some of the younger people thought it sounded like Asenath's.
It was heard only at rare intervals, and would sometimes be choked off as if by force.
There was talk of an investigation, but this was dispelled one day when Asenath appeared in the streets and chatted in a sprightly way with a large number of acquaintances apologizing for her recent absence and speaking incidentally about the nervous breakdown and hysteria of a guest from Boston.
The guest was never seen, but Asenath's appearance left nothing to be said.
And then someone complicated matters by whispering that the sobs had once or twice been in a man's voice.
One evening in mid October I heard the familiar three and two ring at the front door.
Answering it myself, I found Edward on the steps, and saw in a moment that his personality was the old one which I had not encountered since the day of his ravings on that terrible ride from Chesuncook.
His face was twitching with a mixture of odd emotions in which fear and triumph seemed to share dominion, and he looked furtively over his shoulder as I closed the door behind him.
Following me clumsily to the study, he asked for some whisky to steady his nerves.
I forbore to question him, but waited till he felt like beginning whatever he wanted to say.
At length he ventured some information in a choking voice.
''Asenath has gone, Dan.
We had a long talk last night while the servants were out, and I made her promise to stop preying on me.
Of course I had certain certain occult defenses I never told you about.
She had to give in, but got frightfully angry.
Just packed up and started for New York walked right out to catch the 820 in to Boston.
I suppose people will talk, but I can't help that.
You needn't mention that there was any trouble just say she's gone on a long research trip.
''She's probably going to stay with one of her horrible groups of devotees.
I hope she'll go west and get a divorce anyhow, I've made her promise to keep away and let me alone.
It was horrible, Dan she was stealing my body crowding me out making a prisoner of me.
I lay low and pretended to let her do it, but I had to be on the watch.
I could plan if I was careful, for she can't read my mind literally, or in detail.
All she could read of my planning was a sort of general mood of rebellion and she always thought I was helpless.
Never thought I could get the best of her ... but I had a spell or two that worked.''
Derby looked over his shoulder and took some more whisky.
''I paid off those damned servants this morning when they got back.
They were ugly about it, and asked questions, but they went.
They're her kind Innsmouth people and were hand and glove with her.
I hope they'll let me alone I didn't like the way they laughed when they walked away.
I must get as many of Dad's old servants again as I can.
I'll move back home now.
''I suppose you think I'm crazy, Dan but Arkham history ought to hint at things that back up what I've told you and what I'm going to tell you.
You've seen one of the changes, too in your car after I told you about Asenath that day coming home from Maine.
That was when she got me drove me out of my body.
The last thing I remember was when I was all worked up trying to tell you what that she devil is.
Then she got me, and in a flash I was back at the house in the library where those damned servants had me locked up and in that cursed fiend's body ... that isn't even human.... You know it was she you must have ridden home with that preying wolf in my body you ought to have known the difference!''
I shuddered as Derby paused.
Surely, I had known the difference yet could I accept an explanation as insane as this?
But my distracted caller was growing even wilder.
''I had to save myself I had to, Dan!
She'd have got me for good at Hallowmass they hold a Sabbat up there beyond Chesuncook, and the sacrifice would have clinched things.
She'd have got me for good she'd have been I, and I'd have been she for ever too late My body'd have been hers for good She'd have been a man, and fully human, just as she wanted to be I suppose she'd have put me out of the way killed her own ex body with me in it, damn her, just as she did before just as she, he, or it did before  ''  Edward's face was now atrociously distorted, and he bent it uncomfortably close to mine as his voice fell to a whisper.
''You must know what I hinted in the car that she isn't Asenath at all, but really old Ephraim himself.
I suspected it a year and a half ago, and I know it now.
Her handwriting shows it when she goes off guard sometimes she jots down a note in writing that's just like her father's manuscripts, stroke for stroke and sometimes she says things that nobody but an old man like Ephraim could say.
He changed forms with her when he felt death coming she was the only one he could find with the right kind of brain and a weak enough will he got her body permanently, just as she almost got mine, and then poisoned the old body he'd put her into.
Haven't you seen old Ephraim's soul glaring out of that she devil's eyes dozens of times and out of mine when she has control of my body?''
The whisperer was panting, and paused for breath.
I said nothing, and when he resumed, his voice was nearer normal.
This, I reflected, was a case for the asylum, but I would not be the one to send him there.
Perhaps time and freedom from Asenath would do its work.
I could see that he would never wish to dabble in morbid occultism again.
''I'll tell you more later I must have a long rest now.
I'll tell you something of the forbidden horrors she led me into something of the age old horrors that even now are festering in out of the way corners with a few monstrous priests to keep them alive.
Some people know things about the universe that nobody ought to know, and can do things that nobody ought to be able to do.
I've been in it up to my neck, but that's the end.
Today I'd burn that damned Necronomicon and all the rest if I were librarian at Miskatonic.
''But she can't get me now.
I must get out of that accursed house as soon as I can, and settle down at home.
You'll help me, I know, if I need help.
Those devilish servants, you know and if people should get too inquisitive about Asenath.
You see, I can't give them her address.... Then there are certain groups of searchers certain cults, you know that might misunderstand our breaking up ... some of them have damnably curious ideas and methods.
I know you'll stand by me if anything happens even if I have to tell you a lot that will shock you....''  I had Edward stay and sleep in one of the guest chambers that night, and in the morning he seemed calmer.
We discussed certain possible arrangements for his moving back into the Derby mansion, and I hoped he would lose no time in making the change.
He did not call the next evening, but I saw him frequently during the ensuing weeks.
We talked as little as possible about strange and unpleasant things, but discussed the renovation of the old Derby house, and the travels which Edward promised to take with my son and me the following summer.
Of Asenath we said almost nothing, for I saw that the subject was a peculiarly disturbing one.
Gossip, of course, was rife but that was no novelty in connection with the strange menage at the old Crowninshield house.
One thing I did not like was what Derby's banker let fall in an over expansive mood at the Miskatonic Club about the checks Edward was sending regularly to a Moses and Abigail Sargent and a Eunice Babson in Innsmouth.
That looked as if those evil faced servants were extorting some kind of tribute from him yet he had not mentioned the matter to me.
I wished that the summer and my son's Harvard vacation would come, so that we could get Edward to Europe.
He was not, I soon saw, mending as rapidly as I had hoped he would for there was something a bit hysterical in his occasional exhilaration, while his moods of fright and depression were altogether too frequent.
The old Derby house was ready by December, yet Edward constantly put off moving.
Though he hated and seemed to fear the Crowninshield place, he was at the same time queerly enslaved by it.
He could not seem to begin dismantling things, and invented every kind of excuse to postpone action.
When I pointed this out to him he appeared unaccountably frightened.
His father's old butler who was there with other re acquired servants told me one day that Edward's occasional prowlings about the house, and especially down cellar, looked odd and unwholesome to him.
I wondered if Asenath had been writing disturbing letters, but the butler said there was no mail which could have come from her.
It was about Christmas that Derby broke down one evening while calling on me.
I was steering the conversation toward next summer's travels when he suddenly shrieked and leaped up from his chair with a look of shocking, uncontrollable fright a cosmic panic and loathing such as only the nether gulfs of nightmare could bring to any sane mind.
''My brain!
My brain!
God, Dan it's tugging from beyond knocking clawing that she devil even now Ephraim Kamog!
Kamog!
The pit of the shoggoths Ia!
Shub Niggurath!
The Goat with a Thousand Young!...
''The flame the flame beyond body, beyond life in the earth oh, God!...''
I pulled him back to his chair and poured some wine down his throat as his frenzy sank to a dull apathy.
He did not resist, but kept his lips moving as if talking to himself.
Presently I realized that he was trying to talk to me, and bent my ear to his mouth to catch the feeble words.  ''
again, again she's trying I might have known nothing can stop that force not distance, nor magic, nor death it comes and comes, mostly in the night I can't leave it's horrible oh, God, Dan, if you only knew as I do just how horrible it is!...''
When he had slumped down into a stupor I propped him with pillows and let normal sleep overtake him.
I did not call a doctor, for I knew what would be said of his sanity, and wished to give nature a chance if I possibly could.
He waked at midnight, and I put him to bed upstairs, but he was gone by morning.
He had let himself quietly out of the house and his butler, when called on the wire, said he was at home pacing restlessly about the library.
Edward went to pieces rapidly after that.
He did not call again, but I went daily to see him.
He would always be sitting in his library, staring at nothing and having an air of abnormal listening.
Sometimes he talked rationally, but always on trivial topics.
Any mention of his trouble, of future plans, or of Asenath would send him into a frenzy.
His butler said he had frightful seizures at night, during which he might eventually do himself harm.
I had a long talk with his doctor, banker, and lawyer, and finally took the physician with two specialist colleagues to visit him.
The spasms that resulted from the first questions were violent and pitiable and that evening a closed car took his poor struggling body to the Arkham Sanitarium.
I was made his guardian and called on him twice weekly almost weeping to hear his wild shrieks, awesome whispers, and dreadful, droning repetitions of such phrases as ''I had to do it I had to do it it'll get me it'll get me down there down there in the dark Mother!
Mother!
Dan!
Save me save me  ''  How much hope of recovery there was, no one could say, but I tried my best to be optimistic.
Edward must have a home if he emerged, so I transferred his servants to the Derby mansion, which would surely be his sane choice.
What to do about the Crowninshield place with its complex arrangements and collections of utterly inexplicable objects I could not decide, so left it momentarily untouched telling the Derby household to go over and dust the chief rooms once a week, and ordering the furnace man to have a fire on those days.
The final nightmare came before Candlemas heralded, in cruel irony, by a false gleam of hope.
One morning late in January the sanitarium telephoned to report that Edward's reason had suddenly come back.
His continuous memory, they said, was badly impaired but sanity itself was certain.
Of course he must remain some time for observation, but there could be little doubt of the outcome.
All going well, he would surely be free in a week.
I hastened over in a flood of delight, but stood bewildered when a nurse took me to Edward's room.
The patient rose to greet me, extending his hand with a polite smile but I saw in an instant that he bore the strangely energized personality which had seemed so foreign to his own nature the competent personality I had found so vaguely horrible, and which Edward himself had once vowed was the intruding soul of his wife.
There was the same blazing vision so like Asenath's and old Ephraim's and the same firm mouth!
and when he spoke I could sense the same grim, pervasive irony in his voice the deep irony so redolent of potential evil.
This was the person who had driven my car through the night five months before the person I had not seen since that brief call when he had forgotten the old time door bell signal and stirred such nebulous fears in me and now he filled me with the same dim feeling of blasphemous alienage and ineffable cosmic hideousness.
He spoke affably of arrangements for release and there was nothing for me to do but assent, despite some remarkable gaps in his recent memories.
Yet I felt that something was terribly, inexplicably wrong and abnormal.
There were horrors in this thing that I could not reach.
This was a sane person but was it indeed the Edward Derby I had known?
If not, who or what was it and where was Edward?
Ought it to be free or confined or ought it to be extirpated from the face of the earth?
There was a hint of the abysmally sardonic in everything the creature said the Asenath like eyes lent a special and baffling mockery to certain words about the early liberty earned by an especially close confinement!
I must have behaved very awkwardly, and was glad to beat a retreat.
All that day and the next I racked my brain over the problem.
What had happened?
What sort of mind looked out through those alien eyes in Edward's face?
I could think of nothing but this dimly terrible enigma, and gave up all efforts to perform my usual work.
The second morning the hospital called up to say that the recovered patient was unchanged, and by evening I was close to a nervous collapse a state I admit, though others will vow it colored my subsequent vision.
I have nothing to say on this point except that no madness of mine could account for all the evidence.
It was in the night after that second evening that stark, utter horror burst over me and weighted my spirit with a black, clutching panic from which it can never shake free.
It began with a telephone call just before midnight.
I was the only one up, and sleepily took down the receiver in the library.
No one seemed to be on the wire, and I was about to hang up and go to bed when my ear caught a very faint suspicion of sound at the other end.
Was someone trying under great difficulties to talk?
As I listened I thought I heard a sort of half liquid bubbling noise ''glub ... glub ... glub'' which had an odd suggestion of inarticulate, unintelligible word and syllable divisions.
I called, ''Who is it?''
But the only answer was ''glub glub ... glub glub.''
I could only assume that the noise was mechanical but fancying that it might be a case of a broken instrument able to receive but not to send, I added, ''I can't hear you.
Better hang up and try Information.''
Immediately I heard the receiver go on the hook at the other end.
This, I say, was just before midnight.
When that call was traced afterward it was found to come from the old Crowninshield house, though it was fully half a week from the housemaid's day to be there.
I shall only hint what was found at that house the upheaval in a remote cellar storeroom, the tracks, the dirt, the hastily rifled wardrobe, the baffling marks on the telephone, the clumsily used stationery, and the detestable stench lingering over everything.
The police, poor fools, have their smug little theories, and are still searching for those sinister discharged servants who have dropped out of sight amidst the present furor.
They speak of a ghoulish revenge for things that were done, and say I was included because I was Edward's best friend and adviser.
Idiots!
do they fancy those brutish clowns could have forged that handwriting?
Do they fancy they could have brought what later came?
Are they blind to the changes in that body that was Edward's?
As for me, I now believe all that Edward Derby ever told me.
There are horrors beyond life's edge that we do not suspect, and once in a while man's evil prying calls them just within our range.
Ephraim Asenath that devil called them in, and they engulfed Edward as they are engulfing me.
Can I be sure that I am safe?
Those powers survive the life of the physical form.
The next day in the afternoon, when I pulled out of my prostration and was able to walk and talk coherently I went to the madhouse and shot him dead for Edward's and the world's sake, but can I be sure till he is cremated?
They are keeping the body for some silly autopsies by different doctors but I say he must be cremated.
He must be cremated he who was not Edward Derby when I shot him.
I shall go mad if he is not, for I may be the next.
But my will is not weak and I shall not let it be undermined by the terrors I know are seething around it.
One life Ephraim, Asenath, and Edward who now?
I will not be driven out of my body ...
I will not change souls with that bullet ridden lich in the madhouse!
But let me try to tell coherently of that final horror.
I will not speak of what the police persistently ignored the tales of that dwarfed, grotesque, malodorous thing met by at least three wayfarers in High Street just before two o'clock, and the nature of the single footprints in certain places.
I will say only that just about two the door bell and knocker waked me door bell and knocker both, plied alternately and uncertainly in a kind of weak desperation, and each trying to keep to Edward's old signal of three and two strokes.
Roused from sound sleep, my mind leaped into a turmoil.
Derby at the door and remembering the old code!
That new personality had not remembered it ... was Edward suddenly back in his rightful state?
Why was he here in such evident stress and haste?
Had he been released ahead of time, or had he escaped?
Perhaps, I thought as I flung on a robe and bounded downstairs, his return to his own self had brought raving and violence, revoking his discharge and driving him to a desperate dash for freedom.
Whatever had happened, he was good old Edward again, and I would help him!
When I opened the door into the elm arched blackness a gust of insufferably fetid wind almost flung me prostrate.
I choked in nausea, and for a second scarcely saw the dwarfed, humped figure on the steps.
The summons had been Edward's, but who was this foul, stunted parody?
Where had Edward had time to go?
His ring had sounded only a second before the door opened.
The caller had on one of Edward's overcoats its bottom almost touching the ground, and its sleeves rolled back yet still covering the hands.
On the head was a slouch hat pulled low, while a black silk muffler concealed the face.
As I stepped unsteadily forward, the figure made a semi liquid sound like that I had heard over the telephone ''glub ... glub'' and thrust at me a large, closely written paper impaled on the end of a long pencil.
Still reeling from the morbid and unaccountable fetor, I seized the paper and tried to read it in the light from the doorway.
Beyond question, it was in Edward's script.
But why had he written when he was close enough to ring and why was the script so awkward, coarse and shaky?
I could make out nothing in the dim half light, so edged back into the hall, the dwarf figure clumping mechanically after but pausing on the inner door's threshold.
The odor of this singular messenger was really appalling, and I hoped not in vain, thank God!
that my wife would not wake and confront it.
Then, as I read the paper, I felt my knees give under me and my vision go black.
I was lying on the floor when I came to, that accursed sheet still clutched in my fear rigid hand.
This is what it said  ''Dan go to the sanitarium and kill it.
Exterminate it.
It isn't Edward Derby any more.
She got me it's Asenath and she has been dead three months and a half.
I lied when I said she had gone away.
I killed her.
I had to.
It was sudden, but we were alone and I was in my right body.
I saw a candlestick and smashed her head in.
She would have got me for good at Hallowmass.
''I buried her in the farther cellar storeroom under some old boxes and cleaned up all the traces.
The servants suspected next morning, but they have such secrets that they dare not tell the police.
I sent them off, but God knows what they and others of the cult will do.
''I thought for a while I was all right, and then I felt the tugging at my brain.
I knew what it was I ought to have remembered.
A soul like hers or Ephraim's is half detached, and keeps right on after death as long as the body lasts.
She was getting me making me change bodies with her seizing my body and putting me in that corpse of hers buried in the cellar.
''I knew what was coming that's why I snapped and had to go to the asylum.
Then it came I found myself choked in the dark in Asenath's rotting carcass down there in the cellar under the boxes where I put it.
And I knew she must be in my body at the sanitarium permanently, for it was after Hallowmass, and the sacrifice would work even without her being there sane, and ready for release as a menace to the world.
I was desperate, and in spite of everything I clawed my way out.
''I'm too far gone to talk I couldn't manage to telephone but I can still write.
I'll get fixed up somehow and bring this last word and warning.
Kill that fiend if you value the peace and comfort of the world.
See that it is cremated.
If you don't, it will live on and on, body to body for ever, and I can't tell you what it will do.
Keep clear of black magic, Dan it's the devil's business.
Good bye you've been a great friend.
Tell the police whatever they'll believe and I'm damnably sorry to drag all this on you.
I'll be at peace before long this thing won't hold together much more.
Hope you can read this.
And kill that thing kill it.
''Yours ED.''
It was only afterward that I read the last half of this paper, for I had fainted at the end of the third paragraph.
I fainted again when I saw and smelled what cluttered up the threshold where the warm air had struck it.
The messenger would not move or have consciousness any more.
The butler, tougher fibered than I, did not faint at what met him in the hall in the morning.
Instead, he telephoned the police.
When they came I had been taken upstairs to bed, but the other mass lay where it had collapsed in the night.
The men put handkerchiefs to their noses.
What they finally found inside Edward's oddly assorted clothes was mostly liquescent horror.
There were bones, too and a crushed in skull.
Some dental work positively identified the skull as Asenath's.
It was on a certain Thursday morning in December that the whole thing began with that unaccountable motion I thought I saw in my antique Copenhagen mirror.
Something, it seemed to me, stirred something reflected in the glass, though I was alone in my quarters.
I paused and looked intently, then, deciding that the effect must be a pure illusion, resumed the interrupted brushing of my hair.
I had discovered the old mirror, covered with dust and cobwebs, in an out building of an abandoned estate house in Santa Cruz's sparsely settled Northside territory, and had brought it to the United States from the Virgin Islands.
The venerable glass was dim from more than two hundred years' exposure to a tropical climate, and the graceful ornamentation along the top of the gilt frame had been badly smashed.
I had had the detached pieces set back into the frame before placing it in storage with my other belongings.
Now, several years later, I was staying half as a guest and half as a tutor at the private school of my old friend Browne on a windy Connecticut hillside occupying an unused wing in one of the dormitories, where I had two rooms and a hallway to myself.
The old mirror, stowed securely in mattresses, was the first of my possessions to be unpacked on my arrival and I had set it up majestically in the living room, on top of an old rosewood console which had belonged to my great grandmother.
The door of my bedroom was just opposite that of the living room, with a hallway between and I had noticed that by looking into my chiffonier glass I could see the larger mirror through the two doorways which was exactly like glancing down an endless, though diminishing, corridor.
On this Thursday morning I thought I saw a curious suggestion of motion down that normally empty corridor but, as I have said, soon dismissed the notion.
When I reached the dining room I found everyone complaining of the cold, and learned that the school's heating plant was temporarily out of order.
Being especially sensitive to low temperatures, I was myself an acute sufferer and at once decided not to brave any freezing schoolroom that day.
Accordingly I invited my class to come over to my living room for an informal session around my grate fire a suggestion which the boys received enthusiastically.
After the session one of the boys, Robert Grandison, asked if he might remain since he had no appointment for the second morning period.
I told him to stay, and welcome.
He sat down to study in front of the fireplace in a comfortable chair.
It was not long, however, before Robert moved to another chair somewhat farther away from the freshly replenished blaze, this change bringing him directly opposite the old mirror.
From my own chair in another part of the room I noticed how fixedly he began to look at the dim, cloudy glass, and, wondering what so greatly interested him, was reminded of my own experience earlier that morning.
As time passed he continued to gaze, a slight frown knitting his brows.
At last I quietly asked him what had attracted his attention.
Slowly, and still wearing the puzzled frown, he looked over and replied rather cautiously  ''It's the corrugations in the glass or whatever they are, Mr. Canevin.
I was noticing how they all seem to run from a certain point.
Look I'll show you what I mean.''
The boy jumped up, went over to the mirror, and placed his finger on a point near its lower left hand corner.
''It's right here, sir,'' he explained, turning to look toward me and keeping his finger on the chosen spot.
His muscular action in turning may have pressed his finger against the glass.
Suddenly he withdrew his hand as though with some slight effort, and with a faintly muttered ''Ouch.''
Then he looked back at the glass in obvious mystification.
''What happened?''
I asked, rising and approaching.
''Why it '' He seemed embarrassed.
''It I felt well, as though it were pulling my finger into it.
Seems er perfectly foolish, sir, but well it was a most peculiar sensation.''
Robert had an unusual vocabulary for his fifteen years.
I came over and had him show me the exact spot he meant.
''You'll think I'm rather a fool, sir,'' he said shamefacedly, ''but well, from right here I can't be absolutely sure.
From the chair it seemed to be clear enough.''
Now thoroughly interested, I sat down in the chair Robert had occupied and looked at the spot he selected on the mirror.
Instantly the thing ''jumped out at me.''
Unmistakably, from that particular angle, all the many whorls in the ancient glass appeared to converge like a large number of spread strings held in one hand and radiating out in streams.
Getting up and crossing to the mirror, I could no longer see the curious spot.
Only from certain angles, apparently, was it visible.
Directly viewed, that portion of the mirror did not even give back a normal reflection for I could not see my face in it.
Manifestly I had a minor puzzle on my hands.
Presently the school gong sounded, and the fascinated Robert Grandison departed hurriedly, leaving me alone with my odd little problem in optics.
I raised several window shades, crossed the hallway, and sought for the spot in the chiffonier mirror's reflection.
Finding it readily, I looked very intently and thought I again detected something of the ''motion.''
I craned my neck, and at last, at a certain angle of vision, the thing again ''jumped out at me.''
The vague ''motion'' was now positive and definite an appearance of torsional movement, or of whirling much like a minute yet intense whirlwind or waterspout, or a huddle of autumn leaves dancing circularly in an eddy of wind along a level lawn.
It was, like the earth's, a double motion around and around, and at the same time inward, as if the whorls poured themselves endlessly toward some point inside the glass.
Fascinated, yet realizing that the thing must be an illusion, I grasped an impression of quite distinct suction, and thought of Robert's embarrassed explanation ''I felt as though it were pulling my finger into it.''
A kind of slight chill ran suddenly up and down my backbone.
There was something here distinctly worth looking into.
And as the idea of investigation came to me, I recalled the rather wistful expression of Robert Grandison when the gong called him to class.
I remembered how he had looked back over his shoulder as he walked obediently out into the hallway, and resolved that he should be included in whatever analysis I might make of this little mystery.
Exciting events connected with that same Robert, however, were soon to chase all thoughts of the mirror from my consciousness for a time.
I was away all that afternoon, and did not return to the school until the five fifteen ''Call over'' a general assembly at which the boys' attendance was compulsory.
Dropping in at this function with the idea of picking Robert up for a session with the mirror, I was astonished and pained to find him absent a very unusual and unaccountable thing in his case.
That evening Browne told me that the boy had actually disappeared, a search in his room, in the gymnasium, and in all other accustomed places being unavailing, though all his belongings including his outdoor clothing were in their proper places.
He had not been encountered on the ice or with any of the hiking groups that afternoon, and telephone calls to all the school catering merchants of the neighborhood were in vain.
There was, in short, no record of his having been seen since the end of the lesson periods at two fifteen when he had turned up the stairs toward his room in Dormitory Number Three.
When the disappearance was fully realized, the resulting sensation was tremendous throughout the school.
Browne, as headmaster, had to bear the brunt of it and such an unprecedented occurrence in his well regulated, highly organized institution left him quite bewildered.
It was learned that Robert had not run away to his home in western Pennsylvania, nor did any of the searching parties of boys and masters find any trace of him in the snowy countryside around the school.
So far as could be seen, he had simply vanished.
Robert's parents arrived on the afternoon of the second day after his disappearance.
They took their trouble quietly, though, of course, they were staggered by this unexpected disaster.
Browne looked ten years older for it, but there was absolutely nothing that could be done.
By the fourth day the case had settled down in the opinion of the school as an insoluble mystery.
Mr. and Mrs. Grandison went reluctantly back to their home, and on the following morning the ten days' Christmas vacation began.
Boys and masters departed in anything but the usual holiday spirit and Browne and his wife were left, along with the servants, as my only fellow occupants of the big place.
Without the masters and boys it seemed a very hollow shell indeed.
That afternoon I sat in front of my grate fire thinking about Robert's disappearance and evolving all sorts of fantastic theories to account for it.
By evening I had acquired a bad headache, and ate a light supper accordingly.
Then, after a brisk walk around the massed buildings, I returned to my living room and took up the burden of thought once more.
A little after ten o'clock I awakened in my armchair, stiff and chilled, from a doze during which I had let the fire go out.
I was physically uncomfortable, yet mentally aroused by a peculiar sensation of expectancy and possible hope.
Of course it had to do with the problem that was harassing me.
For I had started from that inadvertent nap with a curious, persistent idea the odd idea that a tenuous, hardly recognizable Robert Grandison had been trying desperately to communicate with me.
I finally went to bed with one conviction unreasoningly strong in my mind.
Somehow I was sure that young Robert Grandison was still alive.
That I should be receptive of such a notion will not seem strange to those who know of my long residence in the West Indies and my close contact with unexplained happenings there.
It will not seem strange, either, that I fell asleep with an urgent desire to establish some sort of mental communication with the missing boy.
Even the most prosaic scientists affirm, with Freud, Jung, and Adler, that the subconscious mind is most open to external impression in sleep though such impressions are seldom carried over intact into the waking state.
Going a step further and granting the existence of telepathic forces, it follows that such forces must act most strongly on a sleeper so that if I were ever to get a definite message from Robert, it would be during a period of profoundest slumber.
Of course, I might lose the message in waking but my aptitude for retaining such things has been sharpened by types of mental discipline picked up in various obscure corners of the globe.
I must have dropped asleep instantaneously, and from the vividness of my dreams and the absence of wakeful intervals I judge that my sleep was a very deep one.
It was six forty five when I awakened, and there still lingered with me certain impressions which I knew were carried over from the world of somnolent cerebration.
Filling my mind was the vision of Robert Grandison strangely transformed to a boy of a dull greenish dark blue color Robert desperately endeavoring to communicate with me by means of speech, yet finding some almost insuperable difficulty in so doing.
A wall of curious spatial separation seemed to stand between him and me a mysterious, invisible wall which completely baffled us both.
I had seen Robert as though at some distance, yet queerly enough he seemed at the same time to be just beside me.
He was both larger and smaller than in real life, his apparent size varying directly, instead of inversely, with the distance as he advanced and retreated in the course of conversation.
That is, he grew larger instead of smaller to my eye when he stepped away or backwards, and vice versa as if the laws of perspective in his case had been wholly reversed.
His aspect was misty and uncertain as if he lacked sharp or permanent outlines and the anomalies of his coloring and clothing baffled me utterly at first.
At some point in my dream Robert's vocal efforts had finally crystallized into audible speech albeit speech of an abnormal thickness and dullness.
I could not for a time understand anything he said, and even in the dream racked my brain for a clue to where he was, what he wanted to tell, and why his utterance was so clumsy and unintelligible.
Then little by little I began to distinguish words and phrases, the very first of which sufficed to throw my dreaming self into the wildest excitement and to establish a certain mental connection which had previously refused to take conscious form because of the utter incredibility of what it implied.
I do not know how long I listened to those halting words amidst my deep slumber, but hours must have passed while the strangely remote speaker struggled on with his tale.
There was revealed to me such a circumstance as I cannot hope to make others believe without the strongest corroborative evidence, yet which I was quite ready to accept as truth both in the dream and after waking because of my formed contacts with uncanny things.
The boy was obviously watching my face mobile in receptive sleep as he choked along for about the time I began to comprehend him, his own expression brightened and gave signs of gratitude and hope.
Any attempt to hint at Robert's message, as it lingered in my ears after a sudden awakening in the cold, brings this narrative to a point where I must choose my words with the greatest care.
Everything involved is so difficult to record that one tends to flounder helplessly.
I have said that the revelation established in my mind a certain connection which reason had not allowed me to formulate consciously before.
This connection, I need no longer hesitate to hint, had to do with the old Copenhagen mirror whose suggestions of motion had so impressed me on the morning of the disappearance, and whose whorl like contours and apparent illusions of suction had later exerted such a disquieting fascination on both Robert and me.
Resolutely, though my outer consciousness had previously rejected what my intuition would have liked to imply, it could reject that stupendous conception no longer.
What was fantasy in the tale of ''Alice'' now came to me as a grave and immediate reality.
That looking glass had indeed possessed a malign, abnormal suction and the struggling speaker in my dream made clear the extent to which it violated all the known precedents of human experience and all the age old laws of our three sane dimensions.
It was more than a mirror it was a gate a trap a link with spatial recesses not meant for the denizens of our visible universe, and realizable only in terms of the most intricate non Euclidean mathematics.
And in some outrageous fashion Robert Grandison had passed out of our ken into the glass and was there immured, waiting for release.
It is significant that upon awakening I harbored no genuine doubt of the reality of the revelation.
That I had actually held conversation with a trans dimensional Robert, rather than evoked the whole episode from my broodings about his disappearance and about the old illusions of the mirror, was as certain to my inmost instincts as any of the instinctive certainties commonly recognized as valid.
The tale thus unfolded to me was of the most incredibly bizarre character.
As had been clear on the morning of his disappearance, Robert was intensely fascinated by the ancient mirror.
All through the hours of school, he had it in mind to come back to my living room and examine it further.
When he did arrive, after the close of the school day, it was somewhat later than two twenty, and I was absent in town.
Finding me out and knowing that I would not mind, he had come into my living room and gone straight to the mirror standing before it and studying the place where, as we had noted, the whorls appeared to converge.
Then, quite suddenly, there had come to him an overpowering urge to place his hand upon this whorl center.
Almost reluctantly, against his better judgment, he had done so and upon making the contact had felt at once the strange, almost painful suction which had perplexed him that morning.
Immediately thereafter quite without warning, but with a wrench which seemed to twist and tear every bone and muscle in his body and to bulge and press and cut at every nerve he had been abruptly drawn through and found himself inside.
Illustration He felt a strange, almost painful suction.
Once through, the excruciatingly painful stress upon his entire system was suddenly released.
He felt, he said, as though he had just been born a feeling that made itself evident every time he tried to do anything walk, stoop, turn his head, or utter speech.
Everything about his body seemed a misfit.
These sensations wore off after a long while, Robert's body becoming an organized whole rather than a number of protesting parts.
Of all the forms of expression, speech remained the most difficult doubtless because it is complicated, bringing into play a number of different organs, muscles, and tendons.
Robert's feet, on the other hand, were the first members to adjust themselves to the new conditions within the glass.
During the morning hours I rehearsed the whole reason defying problem correlating everything I had seen and heard, dismissing the natural scepticism of a man of sense, and scheming to devise possible plans for Robert's release from his incredible prison.
As I did so a number of originally perplexing points became clear or at least, clearer to me.
There was, for example, the matter of Robert's coloring.
His face and hands, as I have indicated, were a kind of dull greenish dark blue and I may add that his familiar blue Norfolk jacket had turned to a pale lemon yellow while his trousers remained a neutral gray as before.
Reflecting on this after waking, I found the circumstance closely allied to the reversal of perspective which made Robert seem to grow larger when receding and smaller when approaching.
Here, too, was a physical reversal for every detail of his coloring in the unknown dimension was the exact reverse or complement of the corresponding color detail in normal life.
In physics the typical complementary colors are blue and yellow, and red and green.
These pairs are opposites, and when mixed yield gray.
Robert's natural color was a pinkish buff, the opposite of which is the greenish blue I saw.
His blue coat had become yellow, while the gray trousers remained gray.
This latter point baffled me until I remembered that gray is itself a mixture of opposites.
There is no opposite for gray or rather, it is its own opposite.
Another clarified point was that pertaining to Robert's curiously dulled and thickened speech as well as to the general awkwardness and sense of misfit bodily parts of which he had complained.
This, at the outset, was a puzzle indeed though after long thought the clue occurred to me.
Here again was the same reversal which affected perspective and coloration.
Anyone in the fourth dimension must necessarily be reversed in just this way hands and feet, as well as colors and perspectives, being changed about.
It would be the same with all the other dual organs, such as nostrils, ears, and eyes.
Thus Robert had been talking with a reversed tongue, teeth, vocal cords, and kindred speech apparatus so that his difficulties in utterance were little to be wondered at.
As the morning wore on, my sense of the stark reality and maddening urgency of the dream disclosed situation increased rather than decreased.
More and more I felt that something must be done, yet realized that I could not seek advice or aid.
Such a story as mine a conviction based upon mere dreaming could not conceivably bring me anything but ridicule or suspicions as to my mental state.
And what, indeed, could I do, aided or unaided, with as little working data as my nocturnal impressions had provided?
I must, I finally recognized, have more information before I could even think of a possible plan for releasing Robert.
This could come only through the receptive conditions of sleep, and it heartened me to reflect that according to every probability my telepathic contact would be resumed the moment I fell into deep slumber again.
I accomplished sleeping that afternoon, after a midday dinner at which, through rigid self control, I succeeded in concealing from Browne and his wife the tumultuous thoughts that crashed through my mind.
Hardly had my eyes closed when a dim telepathic image began to appear and I soon realized to my infinite excitement that it was identical with what I had seen before.
If anything, it was more distinct and when it began to speak I seemed able to grasp a greater proportion of the words.
During this sleep I found most of the morning's deductions confirmed, though the interview was mysteriously cut off long prior to my awakening.
Robert had seemed apprehensive just before communication ceased, but had already told me that in his strange fourth dimensional prison colors and spatial relationships were indeed reversed black being white, distance increasing apparent size, and so on.
He had also intimated that, notwithstanding his possession of full physical form and sensations, most human vital properties seemed curiously suspended.
Nutriment, for example, was quite unnecessary a phenomenon really more singular than the omnipresent reversal of objects and attributes, since the latter was a reasonable and mathematically indicated state of things.
Another significant piece of information was that the only exit from the glass to the world was the entrance way, and that this was permanently barred and impenetrably sealed, so far as egress was concerned.
That night I had another visitation from Robert nor did such impressions, received at odd intervals while I slept receptively minded, cease during the entire period of his incarceration.
His efforts to communicate were desperate and often pitiful for at times the telepathic bond would weaken, while at other times fatigue, excitement, or fear of interruption would hamper and thicken his speech.
I may as well narrate as a continuous whole all that Robert told me throughout the whole series of transient mental contacts perhaps supplementing it at certain points with facts directly related after his release.
The telepathic information was fragmentary and often nearly inarticulate, but I studied it over and over during the waking intervals of three intense days classifying and cogitating with feverish diligence, since it was all that I had to go upon if the boy were to be brought back into our world.
The fourth dimensional region in which Robert found himself was not, as in scientific romance, an unknown and infinite realm of strange sights and fantastic denizens but was rather a projection of certain limited parts of our own terrestrial sphere within an alien and normally inaccessible aspect or direction of space.
It was a curiously fragmentary, intangible, and heterogeneous world a series of apparently dissociated scenes merging indistinctly one into the other their constituent details having an obviously different status from that of an object drawn into the ancient mirror as Robert had been drawn.
These scenes were like dream vistas or magic lantern images elusive visual impressions of which the boy was not really a part, but which formed a sort of panoramic background or ethereal environment against which or amidst which he moved.
He could not touch any of the parts of these scenes walls, trees, furniture, and the like but whether this was because they were truly non material, or because they always receded at his approach, he was singularly unable to determine.
Everything seemed fluid, mutable, and unreal.
When he walked, it appeared to be on whatever lower surface the visible scene might have floor, path, greensward, or such but upon analysis he always found that the contact was an illusion.
There was never any difference in the resisting force met by his feet and by his hands when he would stoop experimentally no matter what changes of apparent surface might be involved.
He could not describe this foundation or limiting plane on which he walked as anything more definite than a virtually abstract pressure balancing his gravity.
Of definite tactile distinctiveness it had none, and supplementing it there seemed to be a kind of restricted levitational force which accomplished transfers of altitude.
He could never actually climb stairs, yet would gradually walk up from a lower level to a higher.
Passage from one definite scene to another involved a sort of gliding through a region of shadow or blurred focus where the details of each scene mingled curiously.
All the vistas were distinguished by the absence of transient objects, and the indefinite or ambiguous appearance of such semi transient objects as furniture or details of vegetation.
The lighting of every scene was diffuse and perplexing, and of course the scheme of reversed colors bright red grass, yellow sky with confused black and gray cloud forms, white tree trunks, and green brick walls gave to everything an air of unbelievable grotesquerie.
There was an alteration of day and night, which turned out to be a reversal of the normal hours of light and darkness at whatever point on the earth the mirror might be hanging.
This seemingly irrelevant diversity of the scenes puzzled Robert until he realized that they comprised merely such places as had been reflected for long continuous periods in the ancient glass.
This also explained the odd absence of transient objects, the generally arbitrary boundaries of vision, and the fact that all exteriors were framed by the outlines of doorways or windows.
The glass, it appeared, had power to store up these intangible scenes through long exposure though it could never absorb anything corporeally, as Robert had been absorbed, except by a very different and particular process.
But to me at least the most incredible aspect of the mad phenomenon was the monstrous subversion of our known laws of space involved in the relation of the various illusory scenes to the actual terrestrial regions represented.
I have spoken of the glass as storing up the images of these regions, but this is really an inexact definition.
In truth, each of the mirror scenes formed a true and quasi permanent fourth dimensional projection of the corresponding mundane region so that whenever Robert moved to a certain part of a certain scene, as he moved into the image of my room when sending his telepathic messages, he was actually in that place itself, on earth though under spatial conditions which cut off all sensory communication, in either direction, between him and the present tri dimensional aspect of the place.
Theoretically speaking, a prisoner in the glass could in a few moments go anywhere on our planet into any place, that is, which had ever been reflected in the mirror's surface.
This probably applied even to places where the mirror had not hung long enough to produce a clear illusory scene the terrestrial region being then represented by a zone of more or less formless shadow.
Outside the definite scenes was a seemingly limitless waste of neutral gray shadow about which Robert could never be certain, and into which he never dared stray far lest he become hopelessly lost to the real and mirror worlds alike.
Among the earliest particulars which Robert gave, was the fact that he was not alone in his confinement.
Various others, all in antique garb, were in there with him a corpulent middle aged gentleman with tied queue and velvet knee breeches who spoke English fluently though with a marked Scandinavian accent a rather beautiful small girl with very blonde hair which appeared as glossy dark blue two apparently mute Negroes whose features contrasted grotesquely with the pallor of their reversed colored skins three young men one young woman a very small child, almost an infant and a lean, elderly Dane of extremely distinctive aspect and a kind of half malign intellectuality of countenance.
This last named individual Axel Holm, who wore the satin small clothes, flared skirted coat, and voluminous full bottomed periwig of an age more than two centuries in the past was notable among the little band as being the one responsible for the presence of them all.
He it was who, skilled equally in the arts of magic and glass working, had long ago fashioned this strange dimensional prison in which himself, his slaves, and those whom he chose to invite or allure thither were immured unchangingly for as long as the mirror might endure.
Holm was born early in the seventeenth century, and had followed with tremendous competence and success the trade of a glass blower and molder in Copenhagen.
His glass, especially in the form of large drawing room mirrors, was always at a premium.
But the same bold mind which had made him the first glazier of Europe also served to carry his interests and ambitions far beyond the sphere of mere material craftsmanship.
He had studied the world around him, and chafed at the limitations of human knowledge and capability.
Eventually he sought for dark ways to overcome those limitations, and gained more success than is good for any mortal.
He had aspired to enjoy something like eternity, the mirror being his provision to secure this end.
Serious study of the fourth dimension was far from beginning with Einstein in our own era and Holm, more than erudite in all the methods of his day, knew that a bodily entrance into that hidden phase of space would prevent him from dying in the ordinary physical sense.
Research showed him that the principle of reflection undoubtedly forms the chief gate to all dimensions beyond our familiar three and chance placed in his hands a small and very ancient glass whose cryptic properties he believed he could turn to advantage.
Once ''inside'' this mirror according to the method he had envisaged, he felt that ''life'' in the sense of form and consciousness would go on virtually forever, provided the mirror could be preserved indefinitely from breakage or deterioration.
Holm made a magnificent mirror, such as would be prized and carefully preserved and in it deftly fused the strange whorl configured relic he had acquired.
Having thus prepared his refuge and his trap, he began to plan this mode of entrance and conditions of tenancy.
He would have with him both servitors and companions and as an experimental beginning he sent before him into the glass two dependable Negro slaves brought from the West Indies.
What his sensations must have been upon beholding this first concrete demonstration of his theories, only imagination can conceive.
Undoubtedly a man of his knowledge realized that absence from the outside world if deferred beyond the natural span of life of those within, must mean instant dissolution at the first attempt to return to that world.
But, barring that misfortune or accidental breakage, those within would remain forever as they were at the time of entrance.
They would never grow old, and would need neither food nor drink.
To make his prison tolerable he sent ahead of him certain books and writing materials, a chair and table of stoutest workmanship, and a few other accessories.
He knew that the images which the glass would reflect or absorb would not be tangible, but would merely extend around him like a background of dream.
His own transition in 1687 was a momentous experience and must have been attended by mixed sensations of triumph and terror.
Had anything gone wrong, there were frightful possibilities of being lost in dark and inconceivable multiple dimensions.
For over fifty years he had been unable to secure any additions to the little company of himself and slaves, but later on he had perfected his telepathic method of visualizing small sections of the outside world close to the glass, and attracting certain individuals in those areas through the mirror's strange entrance.
Thus Robert, influenced into a desire to press upon the ''door,'' had been lured within.
Such visualizations depended wholly on telepathy, since no one inside the mirror could see out into the world of men.
It was, in truth, a strange life that Holm and his company had lived inside the glass.
Since the mirror had stood for fully a century with its face to the dusty stone wall of the shed where I found it, Robert was the first being to enter this limbo after all that interval.
His arrival was a gala event, for he brought news of the outside world which must have been of the most startling impressiveness to the more thoughtful of those within.
He, in his turn young though he was felt overwhelmingly the weirdness of meeting and talking with persons who had been alive in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
The deadly monotony of life for the prisoners can only be vaguely conjectured.
As mentioned, its extensive spatial variety was limited to localities which had been reflected in the mirror for long periods and many of these had become dim and strange as tropical climates had made inroads on the surface.
Certain localities were bright and beautiful, and in these the company usually gathered.
But no scene could be fully satisfying since the visible objects were all unreal and intangible, and often of perplexingly indefinite outline.
When the tedious periods of darkness came, the general custom was to indulge in memories, reflections, or conversations.
Each one of that strange, pathetic group had retained his or her personality unchanged and unchangeable, since becoming immune to the time effects of outside space.
The number of inanimate objects within the glass, aside from the clothing of the prisoners, was very small being largely limited to the accessories Holm had provided for himself.
The rest did without even furniture, since sleep and fatigue had vanished along with most other vital attributes.
Such inorganic things as were present, seemed as exempt from decay as the living beings.
The lower forms of animal life were wholly absent.
Robert derived most of his information from Herr Thiele, the gentleman who spoke English with a Scandinavian accent.
This portly Dane had taken a fancy to him, and talked at considerable length.
The others, too, had received him with courtesy and good will Holm himself, seeming well disposed, had told him about various matters including the door of the trap.
The boy, as he told me later, was sensible enough never to attempt communication with me when Holm was nearby.
Twice, while thus engaged, he had seen Holm appear and had accordingly ceased at once.
At no time could I see the world behind the mirror's surface.
Robert's visual image, which included his bodily form and the clothing connected with it, was like the aural image of his halting voice and like his own visualization of myself a case of purely telepathic transmission and did not involve true inter dimensional sight.
However, had Robert been as trained a telepathist as Holm, he might have transmitted a few strong images apart from his immediate person.
Throughout this period of revelation I had, of course, been desperately trying to devise a method for Robert's release.
On the fourth day the ninth after the disappearance I hit on a solution.
Everything considered, my laboriously formulated process was not a very complicated one though I could not tell beforehand how it would work, while the possibility of ruinous consequences in case of a slip was appalling.
This process depended, basically, on the fact that there was no possible exit from inside the glass.
If Holm and his prisoners were permanently sealed in, then release must come wholly from outside.
Other considerations included the disposal of the other prisoners, if any survived, and especially of Axel Holm.
What Robert had told me of him was anything but reassuring and I certainly did not wish him loose in my apartment, free once more to work his evil will upon the world.
The telepathic messages had not made fully clear the effect of liberation on those who had entered the glass so long ago.
There was, too, a final though minor problem in case of success that of getting Robert back into the routine of school life without having to explain the incredible.
In case of failure, it was highly inadvisable to have witnesses present at the release operations and lacking these, I simply could not attempt to relate the actual facts if I should succeed.
Even to me the reality seemed a mad one whenever I let my mind turn from the data so compellingly presented in that tense series of dreams.
When I had thought these problems through as far as possible, I procured a large magnifying glass from the school laboratory and studied minutely every square millimeter of that whorl center which presumably marked the extent of the original ancient mirror used by Holm.
Even with this aid I could not quite trace the exact boundary between the old area and the surface added by the Danish wizard but after a long study decided on a conjectural oval boundary which I outlined very precisely with a soft blue pencil, I then made a trip to Stamford, where I procured a heavy glass cutting tool for my primary idea was to remove the ancient and magically potent mirror from its later setting.
My next step was to figure out the best time of day to make the crucial experiment.
I finally settled on two thirty A.M. both because it was a good season for uninterrupted work, and because it was the ''opposite'' of two thirty P.M., the probable moment at which Robert had entered the mirror.
This form of ''oppositeness'' may or may not have been relevant, but I knew at least that the chosen hour was as good as any and perhaps better than most.
I finally set to work in the early morning of the eleventh day after the disappearance, having drawn all the shades of my living room and closed and locked the door into the hallway.
Following with breathless care the elliptical line I had traced, I worked around the whorl section with my steel wheeled cutting tool.
The ancient glass, half an inch thick, crackled crisply under the firm, uniform pressure and upon completing the circuit I cut around it a second time, crunching the roller more deeply into the glass.
Then, very carefully indeed, I lifted the heavy mirror down from its console and leaned it face inward against the wall prying off two of the thin, narrow boards nailed to the back.
With equal caution I smartly tapped the cut around space with the heavy wooden handle of the glass cutter.
At the very first tap the whorl containing section of glass dropped out on the Bokhara rug beneath.
I did not know what might happen, but was keyed up for anything, and took a deep involuntary breath.
I was on my knees for convenience at the moment, with my face quite near the newly made aperture and as I breathed there poured into my nostrils a powerful dusty odor a smell not comparable to any other I have ever encountered.
Then everything within my range of vision suddenly turned to a dull gray before my failing eye sight as I felt myself overpowered by an invisible force which robbed my muscles of their power to function.
I remember grasping weakly and futilely at the edge of the nearest window drapery and feeling it rip loose from its fastening.
Then I sank slowly to the floor as the darkness of oblivion passed over me.
When I regained consciousness I was lying on the Bokhara rug with my legs held unaccountably up in the air.
The room was full of that hideous and inexplicable dusty smell and as my eyes began to take in definite images I saw that Robert Grandison stood in front of me.
It was he fully in the flesh and with his coloring normal who was holding my legs aloft to bring the blood back to my head as the school's first aid course had taught him to do with persons who had fainted.
For a moment I was struck mute by the stifling odor and by a bewilderment which quickly merged into a sense of triumph.
Then I found myself able to move and speak collectedly.
I raised a tentative hand and waved feebly at Robert.
''All right, old man,'' I murmured, ''you can let my legs down now.
Many thanks.
I'm all right again, I think.
It was the smell I imagine that got me.
Open that farthest window, please wide from the bottom.
That's it thanks.
No leave the shade down the way it was.''
I struggled to my feet, my disturbed circulation adjusting itself in waves, and stood upright hanging to the back of a big chair.
I was still ''groggy,'' but a blast of fresh, bitterly cold air from the window revived me rapidly.
I sat down in the big chair and looked at Robert, now walking toward me.
''First,'' I said hurriedly, ''tell me, Robert those others Holm?
What happened to them, when I opened the exit?''
Robert paused half way across the room and looked at me very gravely.
''I saw them fade away into nothingness Mr. Canevin,'' he said with solemnity ''and with them everything.
There isn't any more 'inside,' sir thank God, and you, sir!''
And young Robert, at last yielding to the sustained strain which he had borne through all those terrible eleven days, suddenly broke down like a little child and began to weep hysterically in great, stifling, dry sobs.
I picked him up and placed him gently on my davenport, threw a rug over him, sat down by his side, and put a calming hand on his forehead.
''Take it easy, old fellow,'' I said soothingly.
The boy's sudden and very natural hysteria passed as quickly as it had come on as I talked to him reassuringly about my plans for his quiet restoration to the school.
The interest of the situation and the need of concealing the incredible truth beneath a rational explanation took hold of his imagination as I had expected and at last he sat up eagerly, telling the details of his release and listening to the instructions I had thought out.
He had, it seems, been in the ''projected area'' of my bedroom when I opened the way back, and had emerged in that actual room hardly realizing that he was ''out.''
Upon hearing a fall in the living room he had hastened thither, finding me on the rug in my fainting spell.
I need mention only briefly my method of restoring Robert in a seemingly normal way how I smuggled him out of the window in an old hat and sweater of mine, took him down the road in my quietly started car, coached him carefully in a tale I had devised, and returned to arouse Browne with the news of his discovery.
He had, I explained, been walking alone on the afternoon of his disappearance and had been offered a motor ride by two young men who, as a joke and over his protests that he could go no farther than Stamford and back, had begun to carry him past that town.
Jumping from the car during a traffic stop with the intention of hitch hiking back before Call Over, he had been hit by another car just as the traffic was released awakening ten days later in the Greenwich home of the people who had hit him.
On learning the date, I added, he had immediately telephoned the school and I, being the only one awake, had answered the call and hurried after him in my car without stopping to notify anyone.
Browne, who at once telephoned to Robert's parents, accepted my story without question and forbore to interrogate the boy because of the latter's manifest exhaustion.
It was arranged that he should remain at the school for a rest, under the expert care of Mrs. Browne, a former trained nurse.
I naturally saw a good deal of him during the remainder of the Christmas vacation, and was thus enabled to fill in certain gaps in his fragmentary dream story.
Now and then we would almost doubt the actuality of what had occurred wondering whether we had not both shared some monstrous delusion born of the mirror's glittering hypnotism, and whether the tale of the ride and accident were not after all the real truth.
But whenever we did so we would be brought back to belief by some monstrous and haunting memory with me, of Robert's dream figure and its thick voice and inverted colors with him, of the whole fantastic pageantry of ancient people and dead scenes that he had witnessed.
And then there was the joint recollection of that damnable dusty odor.... We knew what it meant the instant dissolution of those who had entered an alien dimension a century and more ago.
There are, in addition, at least two lines of rather more positive evidence one of which comes through my researches in Danish annals concerning the sorcerer, Axel Holm.
Such a person, indeed, left many traces in folklore and written records and diligent library sessions, plus conferences with various learned Danes, have shed much light on his evil fame.
At present I need say only that the Copenhagen glass blower born in 1612 was a notorious Luciferian whose pursuits and final vanishing formed a matter of awed debate over two centuries ago.
He had burned with a desire to know all things and to conquer every limitation of mankind to which end he had delved deeply into occult and forbidden fields ever since he was a child.
He was commonly held to have joined a coven of the dreaded witchcult, and the vast lore of ancient Scandinavian myth with its Loki the Sly One and the accursed Fenris Wolf was soon an open book to him.
He had strange interests and objectives, few of which were definitely known, but some of which were recognized as intolerably evil.
It is recorded that his two Negro helpers, originally slaves from the Danish West Indies, had become mute soon after their acquisition by him and that they had disappeared not long before his own disappearance from the ken of mankind.
Near the close of an already long life the idea of a glass of immortality appears to have entered his mind.
That he had acquired an enchanted mirror of inconceivable antiquity was a matter of common whispering it being alleged that he had purloined it from a fellow sorcerer who had entrusted it to him for polishing.
This mirror according to popular tales a trophy as potent in its way as the better known Aegis of Minerva or Hammer of Thor was a small oval object called ''Loki's Glass,'' made of some polished fusible mineral and having magical properties which included the divination of the immediate future and the power to show the possessor his enemies.
That it had deeper potential properties, realizable in the hands of an erudite magician, none of the common people doubted and even educated persons attached much fearful importance to Holm's rumored attempts to incorporate it in a larger glass of immortality.
Then had come the wizard's disappearance in 1687, and the final sale and dispersal of his goods amidst a growing cloud of fantastic legendry.
It was, altogether, just such a story as one would laugh at if possessed of no particular key yet to me, remembering those dream messages and having Robert Grandison's corroboration before me, it formed a positive confirmation of all the bewildering marvels that had been unfolded.
But as I have said, there is still another line of rather positive evidence of a very different character at my disposal.
Two days after his release, as Robert, greatly improved in strength and appearance, was placing a log on my living room fire, I noticed a certain awkwardness in his motions and was struck by a persistent idea.
Summoning him to my desk I suddenly asked him to pick up an ink stand and was scarcely surprised to note that, despite lifelong right handedness, he obeyed unconsciously with his left hand.
Without alarming him, I then asked that he unbutton his coat and let me listen to his cardiac action.
What I found upon placing my ear to his chest and what I did not tell him for some time afterward was that his heart was beating on his right side.
He had gone into the glass right handed and with all organs in their normal positions.
Now he was left handed and with organs reversed, and would doubtless continue so for the rest of his life.
Clearly, the dimensional transition had been no illusion for this physical change was tangible and unmistakable.
Had there been a natural exit from the glass, Robert would probably have undergone a thorough re reversal and emerged in perfect normality as indeed the color scheme of his body and clothing did emerge.
The forcible nature of his release, however, undoubtedly set something awry so that dimensions no longer had a chance to right themselves as chromatic wave frequencies still did.
I had not merely opened Holm's trap I had destroyed it and at the particular stage of destruction marked by Robert's escape some of the reversing properties had perished.
It is significant that in escaping Robert had felt no pain comparable to that experienced in entering.
Had the destruction been still more sudden, I shiver to think of the monstrosities of color the boy would always have been forced to bear.
I may add that after discovering Robert's reversal I examined the rumpled and discarded clothing he had worn in the glass, and found, as I had expected, a complete reversal of pockets, buttons, and all other corresponding details.
At this moment Loki's Glass, just as it fell on my Bokhara rug from the now patched and harmless mirror, weighs down a sheaf of papers on my writing table here in St. Thomas, venerable capital of the Danish West Indies now the American Virgin Islands.
Various collectors of old Sandwich glass have mistaken it for an odd bit of that early American product but I privately realize that my paper weight is an antique of far subtler and more paleologean craftsmanship.
Still, I do not disillusion such enthusiasts.
Into the granite city of Teloth wandered the youth, vine crowned, his yellow hair glistening with myrrh and his purple robe torn with briers of the mountain Sidrak that lies across the antique bridge of stone.
The men of Teloth are dark and stern, and dwell in square houses, and with frowns they asked the stranger whence he had come and what were his name and fortune.
So the youth answered  ''I am Iranon, and come from Aira, a far city that I recall only dimly but seek to find again.
I am a singer of songs that I learned in the far city, and my calling is to make beauty with the things remembered of childhood.
My wealth is in little memories and dreams, and in hopes that I sing in gardens when the moon is tender and the west wind stirs the lotus buds.''
When the men of Teloth heard these things they whispered to one another for though in the granite city there is no laughter or song, the stern men sometimes look to the Karthian hills in the spring and think of the lutes of distant Oonai whereof travelers have told.
And thinking thus, they bade the stranger stay and sing in the square before the Tower of Mlin, though they liked not the color of his tattered robe, nor the myrrh in his hair, nor his chaplet of vine leaves, nor the youth in his golden voice.
At evening Iranon sang, and while he sang an old man prayed and a blind man said he saw a nimbus over the singer's head.
But most of the men of Teloth yawned, and some laughed and some went away to sleep for Iranon told nothing useful, singing only his memories, his dreams, and his hopes.
''I remember the twilight, the moon, and soft songs, and the window where I was rocked to sleep.
And through the window was the street where the golden lights came, and where the shadows danced on houses of marble.
I remember the square of moonlight on the floor, that was not like any other light, and the visions that danced in the moonbeams when my mother sang to me.
And too, I remember the sun of morning bright above the many colored hills in summer, and the sweetness of flowers borne on the south wind that made the trees sing.
''O Aira, city of marble and beryl, how many are thy beauties!
How loved I the warm and fragrant groves across the hyaline Nithra, and the falls of the tiny Kra that flowed through the verdant valley!
In those groves and in that vale the children wove wreaths for one another, and at dusk I dreamed strange dreams under the yath trees on the mountain as I saw below me the lights of the city, and the curving Nithra reflecting a ribbon of stars.
''And in the city were palaces of veined and tinted marble, with golden domes and painted walls, and green gardens with cerulean pools and crystal fountains.
Often I played in the gardens and waded in the pools, and lay and dreamed among the pale flowers under the trees.
And sometimes at sunset I would climb the long hilly street to the citadel and the open place, and look down upon Aira, the magic city of marble and beryl, splendid in a robe of golden flame.
''Long have I missed thee, Aira, for I was but young when we went into exile but my father was thy King and I shall come again to thee, for it is so decreed of Fate.
All through seven lands have I sought thee, and some day shall I reign over thy groves and gardens, thy streets and palaces, and sing to men who shall know whereof I sing, and laugh not.
For I am Iranon, who was a Prince in Aira.''
That night the men of Teloth lodged the stranger in a stable, and in the morning an archon came to him and told him to go to the shop of Athok the cobbler, and be apprenticed to him.
''But I am Iranon, a singer of songs,'' he said, ''and have no heart for the cobbler's trade.''
''All in Teloth must toil,'' replied the archon, ''for that is the law.''
Then said Iranon  ''Wherefore do ye toil is it not that ye may live and be happy?
And if ye toil only that ye may toil more, when shall happiness find you?
Ye toil to live, but is not life made of beauty and song?
And if ye suffer no singers among you, where shall be the fruits of your toil?
Toil without song is like a weary journey without an end.
Were not death more pleasing?''
But the archon was sullen and did not understand, and rebuked the stranger.
''Thou art a strange youth, and I like not thy face or thy voice.
The words thou speakest are blasphemy, for the gods of Teloth have said that toil is good.
Our gods have promised us a haven of life beyond death, where there shall be rest without end, and crystal coldness amidst which none shall vex his mind with thought or his eyes with beauty.
Go thou then to Athok the cobbler or be gone out of the city by sunset.
All here must serve, and song is folly.''
So Iranon went out of the stable and walked over the narrow stone streets between the gloomy square houses of granite, seeking something green, for all was of stone.
On the faces of men were frowns, but by the stone embankment along the sluggish river Zuro sate a young boy with sad eyes gazing into the waters to spy green budding branches washed down from the hills by the freshets.
And the boy said to him ''Art thou not indeed he of whom the archons tell, who seekest a far city in a fair land?
I am Romnod, and born in the blood of Teloth, but am not old in the ways of the granite city, and yearn daily for the warm groves and the distant lands of beauty and song.
Beyond the Karthian hills lieth Oonai, the city of lutes and dancing, which men whisper of and say is both lovely and terrible.
Thither would I go were I old enough to find the way, and thither shouldst thou go and thou wouldst sing and have men listen to thee.
Let us leave the city Teloth and fare together among the hills of spring.
Thou shalt show me the ways of travel and I will attend thy songs at evening when the stars one by one bring dreams to the minds of dreamers.
And peradventure it may be that Oonai the city of lutes and dancing is even the fair Aira thou seekest, for it is told that thou hast not known Aira since old days, and a name often changeth.
Let us go to Oonai, O Iranon of the golden head, where men shall know our longings and welcome us as brothers, nor ever laugh or frown at what we say.''
And Iranon answered  ''Be it so, small one if any in this stone place yearn for beauty he must seek the mountains and beyond, and I would not leave thee to pine by the sluggish Zuro.
But think not that delight and understanding dwell just across the Karthian hills, or in any spot thou canst find in a day's, or a year's, or a lustrum's journey.
Behold, when I was small like thee I dwelt in the valley of Narthos by the frigid Xari, where none would listen to my dreams and I told myself that when older I would go to Sinara on the southern slope, and sing to smiling dromedarymen in the market place.
But when I went to Sinara I found the dromedarymen all drunken and ribald, and saw that their songs were not as mine so I travelled in a barge down the Xari to onyx walled Jaren.
And the soldiers at Jaren laughed at me and drave me out, so that I wandered to other cities.
''I have seen Stethelos that is below the great cataract, and have gazed on the marsh where Sarnath once stood.
I have been to Thraa, Ilarnek, and Kadatheron on the winding river Ai, and have dwelt long in Olathoe in the land of Lomar.
But though I have had listeners sometimes, they have ever been few, and I know that welcome shall wait me only in Aira, the city of marble and beryl where my father once ruled as King.
So for Aira shall we seek, though it were well to visit distant and lute blessed Oonai across the Karthian hills, which may indeed be Aira, though I think not.
Aira's beauty is past imagining, and none can tell of it without rapture, whilst of Oonai the camel drivers whisper leeringly.''
At the sunset Iranon and small Romnod went forth from Teloth, and for long wandered amidst the green hills and cool forests.
The way was rough and obscure, and never did they seem nearer to Oonai the city of lutes and dancing but in the dusk as the stars came out Iranon would sing of Aira and its beauties and Romnod would listen, so that they were both happy after a fashion.
They ate plentifully of fruit and red berries, and marked not the passing of time, but many years must have slipped away.
Small Romnod was now not so small, and spoke deeply instead of shrilly, though Iranon was always the same, and decked his golden hair with vines and fragrant resins found in the woods.
So it came to pass one day that Romnod seemed older than Iranon, though he had been very small when Iranon had found him watching for green budding branches in Teloth beside the sluggish stone banked Zura.
Then one night when the moon was full the travellers came to a mountain crest and looked down upon the myriad lights of Oonai.
Peasants had told them they were near, and Iranon knew that this was not his native city of Aira.
The lights of Oonai were not like those of Aira for they were harsh and glaring, whilst the lights of Aira shine as softly and magically as shone the moonlight on the floor by the window where Iranon's mother once rocked him to sleep with song.
But Oonai was a city of lutes and dancing so Iranon and Romnod went down the steep slope that they might find men to whom songs and dreams would bring pleasure.
And when they were come into the town they found rose wreathed revellers bound from house to house and leaning from windows and balconies, who listened to the songs of Iranon and tossed him flowers and applauded when he was done.
Then for a moment did Iranon believe he had found those who thought and felt even as he, though the town was not an hundredth so fair as Aira.
When dawn came Iranon looked about with dismay, for the domes of Oonai were not golden in the sun, but gray and dismal.
And the men of Oonai were pale with revelling, and dull with wine, and unlike the radiant men of Aira.
But because the people had thrown him blossoms and acclaimed his songs Iranon stayed on, and with him Romnod, who liked the revelry of the town and wore in his dark hair roses and myrtle.
Often at night Iranon sang to the revellers, but he was always as before, crowned only with the vine of the mountains and remembering the marble streets of Aira and the hyaline Nithra.
In the frescoed halls of the monarch did he sing, upon a crystal dais raised over a floor that was a mirror, and as he sang, he brought pictures to his hearers till the floor seemed to reflect old, beautiful and half remembered things instead of the wine reddened feasters who pelted him with roses.
And the King bade him put away his tattered purple, and clothed him in satin and cloth of gold, with rings of green jade and bracelets of tinted ivory, and lodged him in a gilded and tapestried chamber on a bed of sweet carven wood with canopies and coverlets of flower embroidered silk.
Thus dwelt Iranon in Oonai, the city of lutes and dancing.
It is not known how long Iranon tarried in Oonai, but one day the King brought to the palace some wild whirling dancers from the Liranian desert, and dusky flute players from Drinen in the East, and after that the revellers threw their roses not so much at Iranon as at the dancers and the flute players.
And day by day that Romnod who had been a small boy in granite Teloth grew coarser and redder with wine, till he dreamed less and less, and listened with less delight to the songs of Iranon.
But though Iranon was sad he ceased not to sing, and at evening told again his dreams of Aira, the city of marble and beryl.
Then one night the reddened and fattened Romnod snored heavily amidst the poppied silks of his banquet couch and died writhing, whilst Iranon, pale and slender, sang to himself in a far corner.
And when Iranon had wept over the grave of Romnod and strewn it with green budding branches, such as Romnod used to love, he put aside his silks and gauds and went forgotten out of Oonai the city of lutes and dancing clad only in the ragged purple in which he had come, and garlanded with fresh vines from the mountains.
Into the sunset wandered Iranon, seeking still for his native land and for men who would understand and cherish his songs and dreams.
In all the cities of Cydathria and in the lands beyond the Bnazic desert gay faced children laughed at his olden songs and tattered robe of purple but Iranon stayed ever young, and wore wreaths upon his golden head whilst he sang of Aira.
So came he one night to the squalid cot of an antique shepherd, bent and dirty, who kept flocks on a stony slope above a quicksand marsh.
To this man Iranon spoke, as to so many others  ''Canst thou tell me where I may find Aira, the city of marble and beryl, where flows the hyaline Nithra and where the falls of the tiny Kra sing to verdant valleys and hills forested with yath trees?''
And the shepherd, hearing, looked long and strangely at Iranon, as if recalling something very far away in time, and noted each line of the stranger's face, and his golden hair, and his crown of vine leaves.
But he was old, and replied  ''O stranger, I have indeed heard the name of Aira, and the other names thou hast spoken, but they come to me from afar down the waste of long years.
I heard them in my youth from the lips of a playmate, a beggar's boy given to strange dreams, who would weave long tales about the moon and the flowers and the west wind.
We used to laugh at him, for we knew him from his birth though he thought himself a King's son.
He was comely, even as thou, but full of folly and strangeness and he ran away when small to find those who would listen gladly to his songs and dreams.
How often hath he sung to me of lands that never were, and things that never can be!
Of Aira did he speak much of Aira and the river Nithra, and the falls of the tiny Kra.
There would he ever say he once dwelt as a Prince, though here we knew him from his birth.
Nor was there ever a marble city of Aira, or those who could delight in strange songs, save in the dreams of mine old playmate Iranon who is gone.''
And in the twilight, as the stars came out one by one and the moon cast on the marsh a radiance like that which a child sees quivering on the floor as he is rocked to sleep at evening, there walked into the lethal quicksands a very old man in tattered purple, crowned with withered vine leaves and gazing ahead as if upon the golden domes of a fair city where dreams are understood.
That night something of youth and beauty died in the elder world.
Cautious investigators will hesitate to challenge the common belief that Robert Blake was killed by lightning, or by some profound nervous shock derived from an electrical discharge.
It is true that the window he faced was unbroken, but nature has shown herself capable of many freakish performances.
The expression on his face may easily have arisen from some obscure muscular source unrelated to anything he saw, while the entries in his diary are clearly the result of a fantastic imagination aroused by certain local superstitions and by certain old matters he had uncovered.
As for the anomalous conditions at the deserted church on Federal Hill the shrewd analyst is not slow in attributing them to some charlatanry, conscious or unconscious, with at least some of which Blake was secretly connected.
For after all, the victim was a writer and painter wholly devoted to the field of myth, dream, terror, and superstition, and avid in his quest for scenes and effects of a bizarre, spectral sort.
His earlier stay in the city a visit to a strange old man as deeply given to occult and forbidden lore as he had ended amidst death and flame, and it must have been some morbid instinct which drew him back from his home in Milwaukee.
He may have known of the old stories despite his statements to the contrary in the diary, and his death may have nipped in the bud some stupendous hoax destined to have a literary reflection.
Among those, however, who have examined and correlated all this evidence, there remain several who cling to less rational and commonplace theories.
They are inclined to take much of Blake's diary at its face value, and point significantly to certain facts such as the undoubted genuineness of the old church record, the verified existence of the disliked and unorthodox Starry Wisdom sect prior to 1877, the recorded disappearance of an inquisitive reporter named Edwin M. Lillibridge in 1893, and above all the look of monstrous, transfiguring fear on the face of the young writer when he died.
It was one of these believers who, moved to fanatical extremes, threw into the bay the curiously angled stone and its strangely adorned metal box found in the old church steeple the black windowless steeple, and not the tower where Blake's diary said those things originally were.
Though widely censured both officially and unofficially, this man a reputable physician with a taste for odd folklore averred that he had rid the earth of something too dangerous to rest upon it.
Between these two schools of opinion the reader must judge for himself.
The papers have given the tangible details from a skeptical angle, leaving for others the drawing of the picture as Robert Blake saw it or thought he saw it or pretended to see it.
Now, studying the diary closely, dispassionately, and at leisure, let us summarize the dark chain of events from the expressed point of view of their chief actor.
Young Blake returned to Providence in the winter of 1934 5, taking the upper floor of a venerable dwelling in a grassy court off College Street on the crest of the great eastward hill near the Brown University campus and behind the marble John Hay Library.
It was a cozy and fascinating place, in a little garden oasis of village like antiquity where huge, friendly cats sunned themselves atop a convenient shed.
The square Georgian house had a monitor roof, classic doorway with fan carving, small paned windows, and all the other earmarks of early Nineteenth Century workmanship.
Inside were six paneled doors, wide floor boards, a curving colonial staircase, white Adam period mantels, and a rear set of rooms three steps below the general level.
Blake's study, a large southwest chamber, overlooked the front garden on one side, while its west windows before one of which he had his desk faced off from the brow of the hill and commanded a splendid view of the lower town's out spread roofs and of the mystical sunsets that flamed behind them.
On the far horizon were the open countryside's purple slopes.
Against these, some two miles away, rose the spectral hump of Federal Hill, bristling with huddled roofs and steeples whose remote outlines wavered mysteriously, taking fantastic forms as the smoke of the city swirled up and enmeshed them.
Blake had a curious sense that he was looking upon some unknown, ethereal world which might or might not vanish in dream if ever he tried to seek it out and enter it in person.
Having sent home for most of his books, Blake bought some antique furniture suitable to his quarters and settled down to write and paint living alone, and attending to the simple housework himself.
His studio was in a north attic room, where the panes of the monitor roof furnished admirable lighting.
During that first winter he produced five of his best known short stories The Burrower Beneath, The Stairs in the Crypt, Shaggai, In the Vale of Pnath, and The Feaster from the Stars and painted seven canvases studies of nameless, unhuman monsters, and profoundly alien, non terrestrial landscapes.
At sunset he would often sit at his desk and gaze dreamily off at the out spread west the dark towers of Memorial Hall just below, the Georgian court house belfry, the lofty pinnacles of the downtown section, and that shimmering, spire crowned mound in the distance whose unknown streets and labyrinthine gables so potently provoked his fancy.
From his few local acquaintances he learned that the far off slope was a vast Italian quarter, though most of the houses were remnants of older Yankee and Irish days.
Now and then he would train his field glasses on that spectral, unreachable world beyond the curling smoke picking out individual roofs and chimneys and steeples, and speculating upon the bizarre and curious mysteries they might house.
Even with optical aid Federal Hill seemed somehow alien, half fabulous, and linked to the unreal, intangible marvels of Blake's own tales and pictures.
The feeling would persist long after the hill had faded into the violet, lamp starred twilight, and the court house floodlights and the red Industrial Trust beacon had blazed up to make the night grotesque.
Of all the distant objects on Federal Hill, a certain huge, dark church most fascinated Blake.
It stood out with especial distinctness at certain hours of the day, and at sunset the great tower and tapering steeple loomed blackly against the flaming sky.
It seemed to rest on especially high ground for the grimy facade, and the obliquely seen north side with sloping roof and the tops of great pointed windows, rose boldly above the tangle of surrounding ridgepoles and chimney pots.
Peculiarly grim and austere, it appeared to be built of stone, stained and weathered with the smoke and storms of a century and more.
The style, so far as the glass could show, was that earliest experimental form of Gothic revival which preceded the stately Upjohn period and held over some of the outlines and proportions of the Georgian age.
Perhaps it was reared around 1810 or 1815.
As the months passed, Blake watched the far off, forbidding structure with an oddly mounting interest.
Since the vast windows were never lighted, he knew that it must be vacant.
The longer he watched, the more his imagination worked, till at length he began to fancy curious things.
He believed that a vague, singular aura of desolation hovered over the place, so that even the pigeons and swallows shunned its smoky eaves.
Around other towers and belfries his glass would reveal great flocks of birds, but here they never rested.
At least, that is what he thought and set down in his diary.
He pointed the place out to several friends, but none of them had even been on Federal Hill or possessed the faintest notion of what the church was or had been.
In the spring a deep restlessness gripped Blake.
He had begun his long planned novel based on a supposed survival of the witch cult in Maine but was strangely unable to make progress with it.
More and more he would sit at his westward window and gaze at the distant hill and the black, frowning steeple shunned by the birds.
When the delicate leaves came out on the garden boughs the world was filled with a new beauty, but Blake's restlessness was merely increased.
It was then that he first thought of crossing the city and climbing bodily up that fabulous slope into the smoke wreathed world of dream.
Late in April, just before the eon shadowed Walpurgis time, Blake made his first trip into the unknown.
Plodding through the endless downtown streets and the bleak, decayed squares beyond, he came finally upon the ascending avenue of century worn steps, sagging Doric porches, and blear paned cupolas which he felt must lead up to the long known, unreachable world beyond the mists.
There were dingy blue and white street signs which meant nothing to him, and presently he noted the strange, dark faces of the drifting crowds, and the foreign signs over curious shops in brown, decade weathered buildings.
Nowhere could he find any of the objects he had seen from afar so that once more he half fancied that the Federal Hill of that distant view was a dream world never to be trod by living human feet.
Now and then a battered church facade or crumbling spire came in sight, but never the blackened pile that he sought.
When he asked a shopkeeper about a great stone church the man smiled and shook his head, though he spoke English freely.
As Blake climbed higher, the region seemed stranger and stranger, with bewildering mazes of brooding brown alleys leading eternally off to the south.
He crossed two or three broad avenues, and once thought he glimpsed a familiar tower.
Again he asked a merchant about the massive church of stone, and this time he could have sworn that the plea of ignorance was feigned.
The dark man's face had a look of fear which he tried to hide, and Blake saw him make a curious sign with his right hand.
Then suddenly a black spire stood out against the cloudy sky on his left, above the tiers of brown roofs lining the tangled southerly alleys.
Blake knew at once what it was, and plunged toward it through the squalid, unpaved lanes that climbed from the avenue.
Twice he lost his way, but he somehow dared not ask any of the patriarchs or housewives who sat on their door steps, or any of the children who shouted and played in the mud of the shadowy lanes.
At last he saw the tower plain against the southwest, and a huge stone bulk rose darkly at the end of an alley.
Presently he stood in a wind swept open square, quaintly cobblestoned, with a high bank wall on the farther side.
This was the end of his quest for upon the wide, iron railed, weed grown plateau which the wall supported a separate, lesser world raised fully six feet above the surrounding streets there stood a grim, titan bulk whose identity, despite Blake's new perspective, was beyond dispute.
The vacant church was in a state of great decrepitude.
Some of the high stone buttresses had fallen, and several delicate finials lay half lost among the brown, neglected weeds and grasses.
The sooty Gothic windows were largely unbroken, though many of the stone mullions were missing.
Blake wondered how the obscurely painted panes could have survived so well, in view of the known habits of small boys the world over.
The massive doors were intact and tightly closed.
Around the top of the bank wall, fully enclosing the grounds, was a rusty iron fence whose gate at the head of a flight of steps from the square was visibly padlocked.
The path from the gate to the building was completely overgrown.
Desolation and decay hung like a pall above the place, and in the birdless eaves and black, ivyless walls Blake felt a touch of the dimly sinister beyond his power to define.
There were very few people in the square, but Blake saw a policeman at the northerly end and approached him with questions about the church.
He was a great wholesome Irishman, and it seemed odd that he would do little more than make the sign of the cross and mutter that people never spoke of that building.
When Blake pressed him he said very hurriedly that the Italian priests warned everybody against it, vowing that a monstrous evil had once dwelt there and left its mark.
He himself had heard dark whispers of it from his father, who recalled certain sounds and rumors from his boyhood.
There had been a bad sect there in the ould days an outlaw sect that called up awful things from some unknown gulf of night.
It had taken a good priest to exorcise what had come, though there did be those who said that merely the light could do it.
If Father O'Malley were alive there would be many the thing he could tell.
But now there was nothing to do but let it alone.
It hurt nobody now, and those that owned it were dead or far away.
They had run away like rats after the threatening talk in '77, when people began to mind the way folks vanished now and then in the neighborhood.
Some day the city would step in and take the property for lack of heirs, but little good would come of anybody's touching it.
Better it be left alone for the years to topple, lest things be stirred that ought to rest for ever in their black abyss.
After the policeman had gone Blake stood staring at the sullen steepled pile.
It excited him to find that the structure seemed as sinister to others as to him, and he wondered what grain of truth might lie behind the old tales the bluecoat had repeated.
Probably they were mere legends evoked by the evil look of the place, but even so, they were like a strange coming to life of one of his own stories.
The afternoon sun came out from behind dispersing clouds, but seemed unable to light up the stained, sooty walls of the old temple that towered on its high plateau.
It was odd that the green of spring had not touched the brown, withered growths in the raised, iron fenced yard.
Blake found himself edging nearer the raised area and examining the bank wall and rusted fence for possible avenues of ingress.
There was a terrible lure about the blackened fane which was not to be resisted.
The fence had no opening near the steps, but around on the north side were some missing bars.
He could go up the steps and walk around on the narrow coping outside the fence till he came to the gap.
If the people feared the place so wildly, he would encounter no interference.
He was on the embankment and almost inside the fence before anyone noticed him.
Then, looking down, he saw the few people in the square edging away and making the same sign with their right hands that the shopkeeper in the avenue had made.
Several windows were slammed down, and a fat woman darted into the street and pulled some small children inside a rickety, unpainted house.
The gap in the fence was very easy to pass through, and before long Blake found himself wading amidst the rotting, tangled growths of the deserted yard.
Here and there the worn stump of a headstone told him that there had once been burials in this field but that, he saw, must have been very long ago.
The sheer bulk of the church was oppressive now that he was close to it, but he conquered his mood and approached to try the three great doors in the facade.
All were securely locked, so he began a circuit of the Cyclopean building in quest of some minor and more penetrable opening.
Even then he could not be sure that he wished to enter that haunt of desertion and shadow, yet the pull of its strangeness dragged him on automatically.
A yawning and unprotected cellar window in the rear furnished the needed aperture.
Peering in, Blake saw a subterrene gulf of cobwebs and dust faintly litten by the western sun's filtered rays.
Debris, old barrels, and ruined boxes and furniture of numerous sorts met his eye, though over everything lay a shroud of dust which softened all sharp outlines.
The rusted remains of a hot air furnace showed that the building had been used and kept in shape as late as mid Victorian times.
Acting almost without conscious initiative, Blake crawled through the window and let himself down to the dust carpeted and debris strewn concrete floor.
The vaulted cellar was a vast one, without partitions and in a corner far to the right, amid dense shadows, he saw a black archway evidently leading upstairs.
He felt a peculiar sense of oppression at being actually within the great spectral building, but kept it in check as he cautiously scouted about finding a still intact barrel amid the dust, and rolling it over to the open window to provide for his exit.
Then, bracing himself, he crossed the wide, cobweb festooned space toward the arch.
Half choked with the omnipresent dust, and covered with ghostly gossamer fibers, he reached and began to climb the worn stone steps which rose into the darkness.
He had no light, but groped carefully with his hands.
After a sharp turn he felt a closed door ahead, and a little fumbling revealed its ancient latch.
It opened inward, and beyond it he saw a dimly illumined corridor lined with worm eaten paneling.
Once on the ground floor, Blake began exploring in a rapid fashion.
All the inner doors were unlocked, so that he freely passed from room to room.
The colossal nave was an almost eldritch place with its drifts and mountains of dust over box pews, altar, hour glass pulpit, and sounding board, and its titanic ropes of cobweb stretching among the pointed arches of the gallery and entwining the clustered Gothic columns.
Over all this hushed desolation played a hideous leaden light as the declining afternoon sun sent its rays through the strange, half blackened panes of the great apsidal windows.
The paintings on those windows were so obscured by soot that Blake could scarcely decipher what they had represented, but from the little he could make out he did not like them.
The designs were largely conventional, and his knowledge of obscure symbolism told him much concerning some of the ancient patterns.
The few saints depicted bore expressions distinctly open to criticism, while one of the windows seemed to show merely a dark space with spirals of curious luminosity scattered about in it.
Turning away from the windows, Blake noticed that the cobwebbed cross above the altar was not of the ordinary kind, but resembled the primordial ankh or crux ansata of shadowy Egypt.
In a rear vestry room beside the apse Blake found a rotting desk and ceiling high shelves of mildewed, disintegrating books.
Here for the first time he received a positive shock of objective horror, for the titles of those books told him much.
They were the black, forbidden things which most sane people have never even heard of, or have heard of only in furtive, timorous whispers the banned and dreaded repositories of equivocal secrets and immemorial formulae which have trickled down the stream of time from the days of man's youth, and the dim, fabulous days before man was.
He had himself read many of them a Latin version of the abhorred Necronomicon, the sinister Liber Ivonis, the infamous Cultes des Goules of Comte d'Erlette, the Unaussprechlichen Kulten of von Junzt, and old Ludvig Prinn's hellish De Vermis Mysteriis.
But there were others he had known merely by reputation or not at all the Pnakotic Manuscripts, the Book of Dzyan, and a crumbling volume in wholly unidentifiable characters yet with certain symbols and diagrams shudderingly recognizable to the occult student.
Clearly, the lingering local rumors had not lied.
This place had once been the seat of an evil older than mankind and wider than the known universe.
In the ruined desk was a small leather bound record book filled with entries in some odd cryptographic medium.
The manuscript writing consisted of the common traditional symbols used today in astronomy and anciently in alchemy, astrology, and other dubious arts the devices of the sun, moon, planets, aspects, and zodiacal signs here massed in solid pages of text, with divisions and paragraphings suggesting that each symbol answered to some alphabetical letter.
In the hope of later solving the cryptogram, Blake bore off this volume in his coat pocket.
Many of the great tomes on the shelves fascinated him unutterably, and he felt tempted to borrow them at some later time.
He wondered how they could have remained undisturbed so long.
Was he the first to conquer the clutching, pervasive fear which had for nearly sixty years protected this deserted place from visitors?
Having now thoroughly explored the ground floor, Blake plowed again through the dust of the spectral nave to the front vestibule, where he had seen a door and staircase presumably leading up to the blackened tower and steeple objects so long familiar to him at a distance.
The ascent was a choking experience, for dust lay thick, while the spiders had done their worst in this constricted place.
The staircase was a spiral with high, narrow wooden treads, and now and then Blake passed a clouded window looking dizzily out over the city.
Though he had seen no ropes below, he expected to find a bell or peal of bells in the tower whose narrow, louver boarded lancet windows his field glass had studied so often.
Here he was doomed to disappointment, for when he attained the top of the stairs he found the tower chamber vacant of chimes, and clearly devoted to vastly different purposes.
The room, about fifteen feet square, was faintly lighted by four lancet windows, one on each side, which were glazed within their screening of decayed louver boards.
These had been further fitted with tight, opaque screens, but the latter were now largely rotted away.
In the center of the dust laden floor rose a curiously angled stone pillar some four feet in height and two in average diameter, covered on each side with bizarre, crudely incised and wholly unrecognizable hieroglyphs.
On this pillar rested a metal box of peculiarly asymmetrical form its hinged lid thrown back, and its interior holding what looked beneath the decade deep dust to be an egg shaped or irregularly spherical object some four inches through.
Around the pillar in a rough circle were seven high backed Gothic chairs still largely intact, while behind them, ranging along the dark paneled walls, were seven colossal images of crumbling, black painted plaster, resembling more than anything else the cryptic carven megaliths of mysterious Easter Island.
In one corner of the cobwebbed chamber a ladder was built into the wall, leading up to the closed trap door of the windowless steeple above.
As Blake grew accustomed to the feeble light he noticed odd bas reliefs on the strange open box of yellowish metal.
Approaching, he tried to clear the dust away with his hands and handkerchief, and saw that the figurings were of a monstrous and utterly alien kind depicting entities which, though seemingly alive, resembled no known life form ever evolved on this planet.
The four inch seeming sphere turned out to be a nearly black, red striated polyhedron with many irregular flat surfaces either a very remarkable crystal of some sort, or an artificial object of carved and highly polished mineral matter.
It did not touch the bottom of the box, but was held suspended by means of a metal band around its center, with seven queerly designed supports extending horizontally to angles of the box's inner wall near the top.
This stone, once exposed, exerted upon Blake an almost alarming fascination.
He could scarcely tear his eyes from it, and as he looked at its glistening surfaces he almost fancied it was transparent, with half formed worlds of wonder within.
Into his mind floated pictures of alien orbs with great stone towers, and other orbs with titan mountains and no mark of life, and still remoter spaces where only a stirring in vague blacknesses told of the presence of consciousness and will.
When he did look away, it was to notice a somewhat singular mound of dust in the far corner near the ladder to the steeple.
Just why it took his attention he could not tell, but something in its contours carried a message to his unconscious mind.
Plowing toward it, and brushing aside the hanging cobwebs as he went, he began to discern something grim about it.
Hand and handkerchief soon revealed the truth, and Blake gasped with a baffling mixture of emotions.
It was a human skeleton, and it must have been there for a very long time.
The clothing was in shreds, but some buttons and fragments of cloth bespoke a man's gray suit.
There were other bits of evidence shoes, metal clasps, huge buttons for round cuffs, a stickpin of bygone pattern, a reporter's badge with the name of the old Providence Telegram, and a crumbling leather pocket book.
Blake examined the latter with care, finding within it several bills of antiquated issue, a celluloid advertising calendar for 1893, some cards with the name ''Edwin M. Lillibridge,'' and a paper covered with penciled memoranda.
This paper held much of a puzzling nature, and Blake read it carefully at the dim westward window.
Its disjointed text included such phrases as the following  ''Prof.
Enoch Bowen home from Egypt May 1844 buys old Free Will Church in July his archaeological work and studies in occult well known.''
''Dr.
Drowne of 4th Baptist warns against Starry Wisdom in sermon Dec. 29, 1844.''
''Congregation 97 by end of '45.''
''1846 3 disappearances first mention of Shining Trapezohedron.''
''7 disappearances 1848 stories of blood sacrifice begin.''
''Investigation 1853 comes to nothing stories of sounds.''
''Fr.
O'Malley tells of devil worship with box found in great Egyptian ruins says they call up something that can't exist in light.
Flees a little light, and banished by strong light.
Then has to be summoned again.
Probably got this from deathbed confession of Francis X. Feeney, who had joined Starry Wisdom in '49.
These people say the Shining Trapezohedron shows them heaven and other worlds, and that the Haunter of the Dark tells them secrets in some way.''
''Story of Orrin B. Eddy 1857.
They call it up by gazing at the crystal, and have a secret language of their own.''
''200 or more in cong.
1863, exclusive of men at front.''
''Irish boys mob church in 1869 after Patrick Regan's disappearance.''
''Veiled article in J.
March 14, '72, but people don't talk about it.''
''6 disappearances 1876 secret committee calls on Mayor Doyle.''
''Action promised Feb. 1877 church closes in April.''
''Gang Federal Hill Boys threaten Dr.    and vestrymen in May.''
''181 persons leave city before end of '77 mention no names.''
''Ghost stories begin around 1880 try to ascertain truth of report that no human being has entered church since 1877.''
''Ask Lanigan for photograph of place taken 1851....''  Restoring the paper to the pocket book and placing the latter in his coat, Blake turned to look down at the skeleton in the dust.
The implications of the notes were clear, and there could be no doubt but that this man had come to the deserted edifice forty two years before in quest of a newspaper sensation which no one else had been bold enough to attempt.
Perhaps no one else had known of his plan who could tell?
But he had never returned to his paper.
Had some bravely suppressed fear risen to overcome him and bring on sudden heart failure?
Blake stooped over the gleaming bones and noted their peculiar state.
Some of them were badly scattered, and a few seemed oddly dissolved at the ends.
Others were strangely yellowed, with vague suggestions of charring.
This charring extended to some of the fragments of clothing.
The skull was in a very peculiar state stained yellow, and with a charred aperture in the top as if some powerful acid had eaten through the solid bone.
What had happened to the skeleton during its four decades of silent entombment here Blake could not imagine.
Illustration ''He had come to the deserted edifice in quest of a newspaper sensation.''
Before he realized it, he was looking at the stone again, and letting its curious influence call up a nebulous pageantry in his mind.
He saw processions of robed, hooded figures whose outlines were not human, and looked on endless leagues of desert lined with carved, sky reaching monoliths.
He saw towers and walls in nighted depths under the sea, and vortices of space where wisps of black mist floated before thin shimmerings of cold purple haze.
And beyond all else he glimpsed an infinite gulf of sheer darkness, where solid and semi solid forms were known only by their windy stirrings, and cloudy patterns of force seemed to superimpose order on chaos and hold forth a key to all the paradoxes and arcana of the worlds we know.
Then all at once the spell was broken by an access of gnawing, indeterminate panic fear.
Blake choked and turned away from the stone, conscious of some formless alien presence close to him and watching him with horrible intentness.
He felt entangled with something something which was not in the stone, but which had looked through it at him something which would ceaselessly follow him with a cognition that was not physical sight.
Plainly, the place was getting on his nerves as well it might in view of his gruesome find.
The light was waning, too, and since he had no illuminant with him he knew he would have to be leaving soon.
It was then, in the gathering twilight, that he thought he saw a faint trace of luminosity in the crazily angled stone.
He had tried to look away from it, but some obscure compulsion drew his eyes back.
Was there a subtle phosphorescence of radio activity about the thing?
What was it that the dead man's notes had said concerning a Shining Trapezohedron?
What, anyway, was this abandoned lair of cosmic evil?
What had been done here, and what might still be lurking in the bird shunned shadows?
It seemed now as if an elusive touch of fetor had arisen somewhere close by, though its source was not apparent.
Blake seized the cover of the long open box and snapped it down.
It moved easily on its alien hinges, and closed completely over the unmistakably glowing stone.
At the sharp click of that closing a soft stirring sound seemed to come from the steeple's eternal blackness overhead, beyond the trap door.
Rats, without question the only living things to reveal their presence in this accursed pile since he had entered it.
And yet that stirring in the steeple frightened him horribly, so that he plunged almost wildly down the spiral stairs, across the ghoulish nave, into the vaulted basement, out amidst the gathering dusk of the deserted square, and down through the teeming, fear haunted alleys and avenues of Federal Hill toward the sane central streets and the home like brick sidewalks of the college district.
During the days which followed, Blake told no one of his expedition.
Instead, he read much in certain books, examined long years of newspaper files downtown, and worked feverishly at the cryptogram in that leather volume from the cobwebbed vestry room.
The cipher, he soon saw, was no simple one and after a long period of endeavor he felt sure that its language could not be English, Latin, Greek, French, Spanish, Italian, or German.
Evidently he would have to draw upon the deepest wells of his strange erudition.
Every evening the old impulse to gaze westward returned, and he saw the black steeple as of yore amongst the bristling roofs of a distant and half fabulous world.
But now it held a fresh note of terror for him.
He knew the heritage of evil lore it masked, and with the knowledge his vision ran riot in queer new ways.
The birds of spring were returning, and as he watched their sunset flights he fancied they avoided the gaunt, lone spire as never before.
When a flock of them approached it, he thought, they would wheel and scatter in panic confusion and he could guess at the wild twitterings which failed to reach him across the intervening miles.
It was in June that Blake's diary told of his victory over the cryptogram.
The text was, he found, in the dark Aklo language used by certain cults of evil antiquity, and known to him in a halting way through previous researches.
The diary is strangely reticent about what Blake deciphered, but he was patently awed and disconcerted by his results.
There are references to a Haunter of the Dark awaked by gazing into the Shining Trapezohedron, and insane conjectures about the black gulfs of chaos from which it was called.
The being is spoken of as holding all knowledge, and demanding monstrous sacrifices.
Some of Blake's entries show fear lest the thing, which he seemed to regard as summoned, stalk abroad though he adds that the street lights form a bulwark which cannot be crossed.
Of the Shining Trapezohedron he speaks often, calling it a window on all time and space, and tracing its history from the days it was fashioned on dark Yuggoth, before ever the Old Ones brought it to earth.
It was treasured and placed in its curious box by the crinoid things of Antarctica, salvaged from their ruins by the serpent men of Valusia, and peered at eons later in Lemuria by the first human beings.
It crossed strange lands and stranger seas, and sank with Atlantis before a Minoan fisher meshed it in his net and sold it to swarthy merchants from nighted Khem.
The Pharaoh Nephren Ka built around it a temple with a windowless crypt, and did that which caused his name to be stricken from all monuments and records.
Then it slept in the ruins of that evil fane which the priests and the new Pharaoh destroyed, till the delver's spade once more brought it forth to curse mankind.
Early in July the newspapers oddly supplement Blake's entries, though in so brief and casual a way that only the diary has called general attention to their contribution.
It appears that a new fear had been growing on Federal Hill since a stranger had entered the dreaded church.
The Italians whispered of unaccustomed stirrings and bumpings and scrapings in the dark windowless steeple, and called on their priests to banish an entity which haunted their dreams.
Something, they said, was constantly watching at a door to see if it were dark enough to venture forth.
Press items mentioned the long standing local superstitions, but failed to shed much light on the earlier background of the horror.
It was obvious that the young reporters of today are no antiquarians.
In writing of these things in his diary, Blake expresses a curious kind of remorse, and talks of the duty of burying the Shining Trapezohedron and of banishing what he had evoked by letting daylight into the hideous jutting spire.
At the same time, however, he displays the dangerous extent of his fascination, and admits a morbid longing pervading even his dreams to visit the accursed tower and gaze again into the cosmic secrets of the glowing stone.
Then something in the Journal on the morning of July 17 threw the diarist into a veritable fever of horror.
It was only a variant of the other half humorous items about the Federal Hill restlessness, but to Blake it was somehow very terrible indeed.
In the night a thunderstorm had put the city's lighting system out of commission for a full hour, and in that black interval the Italians had nearly gone mad with fright.
Those living near the dreaded church had sworn that the thing in the steeple had taken advantage of the street lamps' absence and gone down into the body of the church, flopping and bumping around in a viscous, altogether dreadful way.
Toward the last it had bumped up to the tower, where there were sounds of the shattering of glass.
It could go wherever the darkness reached, but light would always send it fleeing.
When the current blazed on again there had been a shocking commotion in the tower, for even the feeble light trickling through the grime blackened, louver boarded windows was too much for the thing.
It had bumped and slithered up into its tenebrous steeple just in time for a long dose of light would have sent it back into the abyss whence the crazy stranger had called it.
During the dark hour praying crowds had clustered round the church in the rain with lighted candles and lamps somehow shielded with folded papers and umbrellas a guard of light to save the city from the nightmare that stalks in darkness.
Once, those nearest the church declared, the outer door had rattled hideously.
But even this was not the worst.
That evening in the Bulletin Blake read of what the reporters had found.
Aroused at last to the whimsical news value of the scare, a pair of them had defied the frantic crowds of Italians and crawled into the church through the cellar window after trying the doors in vain.
They found the dust of the vestibule and of the spectral nave plowed up in a singular way, with pits of rotted cushions and satin pew linings scattered curiously around.
There was a bad odor everywhere, and here and there were bits of yellow stain and patches of what looked like charring.
Opening the door to the tower, and pausing a moment at the suspicion of a scraping sound above, they found the narrow spiral stairs wiped roughly clean.
In the tower itself a similarly half swept condition existed.
They spoke of the heptagonal stone pillar, the overturned Gothic chairs, and the bizarre plaster images though strangely enough the metal box and the old mutilated skeleton were not mentioned.
What disturbed Blake the most except for the hints of stains and charring and bad odors was the final detail that explained the crashing glass.
Every one of the tower's lancet windows was broken, and two of them had been darkened in a crude and hurried way by the stuffing of satin pew linings and cushion horsehair into the spaces between the slanting exterior louver boards.
More satin fragments and bunches of horsehair lay scattered around the newly swept floor, as if someone had been interrupted in the act of restoring the tower to the absolute blackness of its tightly curtained days.
Yellowish stains and charred patches were found on the ladder to the windowless spire, but when a reporter climbed up, opened the horizontally sliding trap door and shot a feeble flashlight beam into the black and strangely fetid space, he saw nothing but darkness, and an heterogeneous litter of shapeless fragments near the aperture.
The verdict, of course, was charlatanry.
Somebody had played a joke on the superstitious hill dwellers, or else some fanatic had striven to bolster up their fears for their own supposed good.
Or perhaps some of the younger and more sophisticated dwellers had staged an elaborate hoax on the outside world.
There was an amusing aftermath when the police sent an officer to verify the reports.
Three men in succession found ways of evading the assignment, and the fourth went very reluctantly and returned very soon without adding to the account given by the reporters.
From this point onward Blake's diary shows a mounting tide of insidious horror and nervous apprehension.
He upbraids himself for not doing something, and speculates wildly on the consequences of another electrical breakdown.
It has been verified that on three occasions during thunderstorms he telephoned the electric light company in a frantic vein and asked that desperate precautions against a lapse of power be taken.
Now and then his entries show concern over the failure of the reporters to find the metal box and stone, and the strangely marred old skeleton, when they explored the shadowy tower room.
He assumed that these things had been removed whither, and by whom or what, he could only guess.
But his worst fears concerned himself, and the kind of unholy rapport he felt to exist between his mind and that lurking horror in the distant steeple that monstrous thing of night which his rashness had called out of the ultimate black spaces.
He seemed to feel a constant tugging at his will, and callers of that period remember how he would sit abstractedly at his desk and stare out the west window at that far off, spire bristling mound beyond the swirling smoke of the city.
His entries dwell monotonously on certain terrible dreams, and of a strengthening of the unholy rapport in his sleep.
There is mention of a night when he awaked to find himself fully dressed, outdoors, and headed automatically down College Hill toward the west.
Again and again he dwells on the fact that the thing in the steeple knows where to find him.
The week following July 30 is recalled as the time of Blake's partial breakdown.
He did not dress, and ordered all his food by telephone.
Visitors remarked the cords he kept near his bed, and he said that sleep walking had forced him to bind his ankles every night with knots which would probably hold or else waken him with the labor of untying.
In his diary he told of the hideous experience which had brought the collapse.
After retiring on the night of the 30th he had suddenly found himself groping about in an almost black space.
All he could see were short, faint, horizontal streaks of bluish light, but he could smell an overpowering fetor and hear a curious jumble of soft, furtive sounds above him.
Whenever he moved he stumbled over something, and at each noise there would come a sort of answering sound from above a vague stirring, mixed with the cautious sliding of wood on wood.
Once his groping hands encountered a pillar of stone with a vacant top, whilst later he found himself clutching the rungs of a ladder built into the wall, and fumbling his uncertain way upward toward some region of intenser stench where a hot, searing blast beat down against him.
Before his eyes a kaleidoscopic range of fantasmal images played, all of them dissolving at intervals into the picture of a vast, unplumbed abyss of night wherein whirled suns and worlds of an even profounder blackness.
He thought of the ancient legends of Ultimate Chaos, at whose center sprawls the blind idiot god Azathoth, Lord of All Things, encircled by his flopping horde of mindless and amorphous dancers, and lulled by the thin monotonous piping of a demoniac flute held in nameless paws.
Then a sharp report from the outer world broke through his stupor and roused him to the unutterable horror of his position.
What it was, he never knew perhaps it was some belated peal from the fireworks heard all summer on Federal Hill as the dwellers hail their various patron saints, or the saints of their native villages in Italy.
In any event he shrieked aloud, dropped frantically from the ladder, and stumbled blindly across the obstructed floor of the almost lightless chamber that encompassed him.
He knew instantly where he was, and plunged recklessly down the narrow spiral staircase, tripping and bruising himself at every turn.
There was a nightmare flight through a vast cobwebbed nave whose ghostly arches reached up to realms of leering shadow, a sightless scramble through a littered basement, a climb to regions of air and street lights outside, and a mad racing down a spectral hill of gibbering gables, across a grim, silent city of tall black towers, and up the steep eastward precipice to his own ancient door.
On regaining consciousness in the morning he found himself lying on his study floor fully dressed.
Dirt and cobwebs covered him, and every inch of his body seemed sore and bruised.
When he faced the mirror he saw that his hair was badly scorched, while a trace of strange, evil odor seemed to cling to his upper outer clothing.
It was then that his nerves broke down.
Thereafter, lounging exhaustedly about in a dressing gown, he did little but stare from his west window, shiver at the threat of thunder, and make wild entries in his diary.
The great storm broke just before midnight on August 8th.
Lightning struck repeatedly in all parts of the city, and two remarkable fireballs were reported.
The rain was torrential, while a constant fusillade of thunder brought sleeplessness to thousands.
Blake was utterly frantic in his fear for the lighting system, and tried to telephone the company around one a.m., though by that time service had been temporarily cut off in the interest of safety.
He recorded everything in his diary the large, nervous, and often undecipherable hieroglyphs telling their own story of growing frenzy and despair, and of entries scrawled blindly in the dark.
He had to keep the house dark in order to see out the window, and it appears that most of his time was spent at his desk, peering anxiously through the rain across the glistening miles of downtown roofs at the constellation of distant lights marking Federal Hill.
Now and then he would fumblingly make an entry in his diary, so that detached phrases such as ''The lights must not go'' ''It knows where I am'' ''I must destroy it'' and ''It is calling to me, but perhaps it means no injury this time'' are found scattered down two of the pages.
Then the lights went out all over the city.
It happened at 212 a.m. according to power house records, but Blake's diary gives no indication of the time.
The entry is merely, ''Lights out God help me.''
On Federal Hill there were watchers as anxious as he, and rain soaked knots of men paraded the square and alleys around the evil church with umbrella shaded candles, electric flashlights, oil lanterns, crucifixes, and obscure charms of the many sorts common to southern Italy.
They blessed each flash of lightning, and made cryptical signs of fear with their right hands when a turn in the storm caused the flashes to lessen and finally to cease altogether.
A rising wind blew out most of the candles, so that the scene grew threateningly dark.
Someone roused Father Merluzzo of Spirito Santo Church, and he hastened to the dismal square to pronounce whatever helpful syllables he could.
Of the restless and curious sounds in the blackened tower, there could be no doubt whatever.
For what happened at 235 we have the testimony of the priest, a young, intelligent, and well educated person of Patrolman William J. Monahan of the Central Station, an officer of the highest reliability who had paused at that part of his beat to inspect the crowd and of most of the seventy eight men who had gathered around the church's high bank wall especially those in the square where the eastward facade was visible.
Of course there was nothing which can be proved as being outside the order of nature.
The possible causes of such an event are many.
No one can speak with certainty of the obscure chemical processes arising in a vast, ancient, ill aired, and long deserted building of heterogeneous contents.
Mephitic vapors spontaneous combustion pressure of gases born of long decay any one of numberless phenomena might be responsible.
And then, of course, the factor of conscious charlatanry can by no means be excluded.
The thing was really quite simple in itself, and covered less than three minutes of actual time.
Father Merluzzo, always a precise man, looked at his watch repeatedly.
It started with a definite swelling of the dull fumbling sounds inside the black tower.
There had for some time been a vague exhalation of strange, evil odors from the church, and this had now become emphatic and offensive.
Then at last there was a sound of splintering wood, and a large, heavy object crashed down in the yard beneath the frowning easterly facade.
The tower was invisible now that the candles would not burn, but as the object neared the ground the people knew that it was the smoke grimed louver boarding of that tower's east window.
Immediately afterward an utterly unbearable fetor welled forth from the unseen heights, choking and sickening the trembling watchers, and almost prostrating those in the square.
At the same time the air trembled with a vibration as of flapping wings, and a sudden east blowing wind more violent than any previous blast snatched off the hats and wrenched the dripping umbrellas of the crowd.
Nothing definite could be seen in the candleless night, though some upward looking spectators thought they glimpsed a great spreading blur of denser blackness against the inky sky something like a formless cloud of smoke that shot with meteor like speed toward the east.
That was all.
The watchers were half numbed with fright, awe, and discomfort, and scarcely knew what to do, or whether to do anything at all.
Not knowing what had happened, they did not relax their vigil and a moment later they sent up a prayer as a sharp flash of belated lightning, followed by an ear splitting crash of sound, rent the flooded heavens.
Half an hour later the rain stopped, and in fifteen minutes more the street lights sprang on again, sending the weary, bedraggled watchers relievedly back to their homes.
The next day's papers gave these matters minor mention in connection with the general storm reports.
It seems that the great lightning flash and deafening explosion which followed the Federal Hill occurrence were even more tremendous farther east, where a burst of the singular fetor was likewise noticed.
The phenomenon was most marked over College Hill, where the crash awaked all the sleeping inhabitants and led to a bewildered round of speculations.
Of those who were already awake only a few saw the anomalous blaze of light near the top of the hill, or noticed the inexplicable upward rush of air which almost stripped the leaves from the trees and blasted the plants in the gardens.
It was agreed that the lone, sudden lightning bolt must have struck somewhere in this neighborhood, though no trace of its striking could afterward be found.
A youth in the Tau Omega fraternity house thought he saw a grotesque and hideous mass of smoke in the air just as the preliminary flash burst, but his observation has not been verified.
All of the few observers, however, agree as to the violent gust from the west and the flood of intolerable stench which preceded the belated stroke whilst evidence concerning the momentary burned odor after the stroke is equally general.
These points were discussed very carefully because of their probable connection with the death of Robert Blake.
Students in the Psi Delta house, whose upper rear windows looked into Blake's study, noticed the blurred white face at the westward window on the morning of the 9th, and wondered what was wrong with the expression.
When they saw the same face in the same position that evening, they felt worried, and watched for the lights to come up in his apartment.
Later they rang the bell of the darkened flat, and finally had a policeman force the door.
The rigid body sat bolt upright at the desk by the window, and when the intruders saw the glassy, bulging eyes, and the marks of stark, convulsive fright on the twisted features, they turned away in sickened dismay.
Shortly afterward the coroner's physician made an examination, and despite the unbroken window reported electrical shock, or nervous tension induced by an electrical discharge, as the cause of death.
The hideous expression he ignored altogether, deeming it a not improbable result of the profound shock as experienced by a person of such abnormal imagination and unbalanced emotions.
He deduced these latter qualities from the books, paintings, and manuscripts found in the apartment, and from the blindly scrawled entries in the diary on the desk.
Blake had prolonged his frenzied jottings to the last, and the broken pointed pencil was found clutched in his spasmodically contracted right hand.
The entries after the failure of the lights were highly disjointed, and legible only in part.
From them certain investigators have drawn conclusions differing greatly from the materialistic official verdict, but such speculations have little chance for belief among the conservative.
The case of these imaginative theorists has not been helped by the action of superstitious Doctor Dexter, who threw the curious box and angled stone an object certainly self luminous as seen in the black windowless steeple where it was found into the deepest channel of Narragansett Bay.
Excessive imagination and neurotic unbalance on Blake's part, aggravated by knowledge of the evil bygone cult whose startling traces he had uncovered, form the dominant interpretation given those final frenzied jottings.
These are the entries or all that can be made of them.
''Lights still out must be five minutes now.
Everything depends on lightning.
Yaddith grant it will keep up!...
Some influence seems beating through it....
Rain and thunder and wind deafen....
The thing is taking hold of my mind....  ''Trouble with memory.
I see things I never knew before.
Other worlds and other galaxies....
Dark....
The lightning seems dark and the darkness seems light....  ''It cannot be the real hill and church that I see in the pitch darkness.
Must be retinal impression left by flashes.
Heaven grant the Italians are out with their candles if the lightning stops!
''What am I afraid of?
Is it not an avatar of Nyarlathotep, who in antique and shadowy Khem even took the form of man?
I remember Yuggoth, and more distant Shaggai, and the ultimate void of the black planets....  ''The long, winging flight through the void ... cannot cross the universe of light ... re created by the thoughts caught in the Shining Trapezohedron ... send it through the horrible abysses of radiance....  ''My name is Blake Robert Harrison Blake of 620 East Knapp Street, Milwaukee, Wisconsin....
I am on this planet....  ''Azathoth have mercy!
the lightning no longer flashes horrible I can see everything with a monstrous sense that is not sight light is dark and dark is light ... those people on the hill ... guard ... candles and charms ... their priests....  ''Sense of distance gone far is near and near is far.
No light no glass see that steeple that tower window can hear Roderick Usher am mad or going mad the thing is stirring and fumbling in the tower I am it and it is I I want to get out ... must get out and unify the forces....
It knows where I am....  ''I am Robert Blake, but I see the tower in the dark.
There is a monstrous odor ... senses transfigured ... boarding at that tower window cracking and giving way.... Ia ... ngai ... ygg....  ''I see it coming here hell wind titan blur black wings Yog Sothoth save me the three lobed burning eye....''
